# AI Safety Regulations: Prudent or Paranoid? with a16z's Martin Casado
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/ai-safety-regulations-prudent-or-paranoid-with-a16zs-martin-casado/
# Date: 2024-06-28
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

Nathan Labenz: (0:00) Hello and welcome to the Cognitive Revolution where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs, and builders working on the frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week we'll explore their revolutionary ideas and together we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work, life, and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz joined by my cohost Erik Torenberg. Hello and welcome back to the Cognitive Revolution. Today, I'm excited to share my conversation with Martin Casado, general partner at Andreessen Horowitz. Instead of our usual expert interview format, today, Martin and I engage in a genuine back and forth conversation about how we understand today's frontier AI models, the potential for next generation systems to become powerful actors in the world, and what, if anything, we should do about that now. I had initially planned to discuss our respective AI worldviews only briefly before moving on to questions of appropriate commitments, standards, and regulations for AI developers. But we ended up spending a full hour on epistemics and expectations when it became clear that our different outlooks were upstream of any such policy debates. When we did get there in the second half, I found the discussion far more agreeable than you might expect from today's online discourse. In part, I think because we had already identified how we understand the situation differently. If I had to try to characterize our perspectives, I'd say that I am more focused on what I can infer from my understanding of current AI systems capabilities and their mechanisms. While Martin, who to be clear has definitely also studied today's systems on a technical level, seems to base his expectations more on historical examples and the profound complexity of the broader world. 1 key question that emerged is how much the potentially irreducible computational complexity of the universe ultimately matters, and whether AI models will be able to take very effective shortcuts relative to full on simulation. For several reasons, it seems to me that they probably will be able to do this. For 1 thing, we humans seem to do it, so there's some existence proof that it's possible. And for another, we see some aspects of these dramatic shortcuts emerging in the models that we've covered in recent episodes on protein folding and interaction as well as small scale chemistry simulations. That said, it is still the case that no very general system has developed a reliable world model, to say nothing of an adversarially robust world model at this point in time, and I certainly can't prove that it will happen at any point in time or scale. While we didn't reach full agreement on world view, I think this discussion demonstrates that it is absolutely possible to communicate across quite different AI perspectives, and it also reinforces the idea for me that it continues to make more sense to focus our time and energy on understanding what is before jumping to what ought to be done about it. Toward the end, we agreed on the idea of making 1 or more $1 bets about how the near term future will shape up. I invite any interested listeners to try to formalize those conditions. And if you wanna do that on a prediction market platform, I will happily share those links. As always, if you're finding value in the show, we'd appreciate it if you'd share it with a friend. And, of course, we welcome your feedback via our website, cognitiverevolution.ai, where we're accepting resumes that I'll be circulating privately with friendly companies. And, of course, you're always welcome to DM me on any social network, anytime. Now I hope you enjoyed this exploration of AI expectations and implications with Martin Casado of Andreessen Horowitz. Martin Casado, general partner at a16z. Welcome to the Cognitive Revolution.

Martin Casado: (3:22) Very happy to be here.

Nathan Labenz: (3:24) I think this is gonna be a great conversation. We are primarily here to talk about the importance of open source and to dig into a lot of the details of the current debates around early regulation of AI and how that might impact open source and what the pros, if any, and cons, if potentially many of that might be. Before we get into it, I just wanted to get a little bit of your super big picture AI worldview and ask you to project out a little bit. How powerful do you think AI is gonna be over the next couple of years? You know, we've obviously heard AGI 2027. Is that a story you're buying? What do you think we're gonna see over the next 2 to 3 years?

Martin Casado: (4:06) Listen, I I think like all things the past is probably the best predictor of the future. My hope is this continues to be a very useful tool to help us with progress and to stave off this universe that seems pretty destined on killing us. So I'm hoping it continues on that trajectory. What is interesting is if you actually look, let's say, the past 80 years of, quote, unquote, AI, it's been steady progress independent of there being winters and summers. It's been very, very steady progress. There's progress on economics, progress on problem solves. And and every time we, like, tackle a problem, like, everybody's, oh, goodness. This is it. We're almost at AGI. And then it just turns out, like, that's 1 modality. And then we go on to the next, and we say, oh, that wasn't really actually AGI or AI. So, like, this whole AGI thing has been a moving goalpost for 70 years. And so I would say, listen, there's been this kind of very steady progress. We've gotten good at many things. It's been a very useful tool. I hope it continues to be so. I think it's a very important thing for us to continue to develop and use. But I don't think that there's any step change or it changes the nature of computers or software in ways that we haven't seen before. I don't think that.

Nathan Labenz: (5:14) So let me just ask a few a few more concrete things because I'm a big believer in threshold effects. I mean, the topics of emergence, you know, are super hotly debated and is emergence a mirage or not a mirage and maybe the underlying curves are smooth. But in terms of, like, practical utility, even if the capability of the model hasn't taken a sudden shift, the utility and what it can actually practically do in the world sometimes

Martin Casado: (5:40) Totally.

Nathan Labenz: (5:40) Seems to take a a notable leap. I guess right now, I thought Dwork has put this really well on a recent podcast where he said, like, it seems like the models are token for token as smart as most people. And yet there's some things that they're missing. Like, they don't have this great long term memory or the ability to integrate memories. They're not great at autonomy. They fall down and can't get back up or don't know how to dust themselves off. But it seems like the core intelligence is there to do a lot of jobs, and it's this packaging memory agentic finishing that's needed to get to the point where you'd have, like, this sort of knowledge worker. Is that basically the story that you see? And, I mean, does that translate to a I think AGI is, yes, certainly very ill defined, but, like, drop in knowledge worker that could do a large majority of jobs, like, passively well is maybe better defined. Do you see that coming soon?

Martin Casado: (6:34) So again, I think I'd like to draw from a historical analogy because I think they're very useful in this context because I just feel like we see these very often they all look kind of the same and it's played out. And so when I first joined Stanford to do my PhD so I did my PhD in computer science and systems. It was in 2003. And around then, I don't know if was 2003 or 2004, Sebastian Thrun had won the DARPA Grand Challenge. So the DARPA Grand Challenge is he drove a van autonomously, fully autonomously for 1,200 miles. And everybody was like, hooray. Like, AGI is solved. Robotaxi is solved. This is amazing thing. And a 100%, we've hit 1 of these threshold moments. A 100%, like, you could actually do things you couldn't do before. It was the start of a new era of vision and perception and self driving. And now 20 years later and a 100 about a $100,000,000,000 invested, a little bit less than a $100,000,000,000 invested, the unit economics of self driving are still 3 times worse than Uber. And so I'm a systems person, meaning I all I've been doing for the last 30 years of my life is building computer systems, large distributed systems. This is what I do. And I just know that scalar capabilities, a, they're not necessarily parametric. So they don't necessarily just go up into the right. And there's so many examples of this and we can talk about that. I know that the universe is this very heavy tailed system, and there's no single solution that tends to reign in its complexity. I know that the economics for these things are very, very hard. Like, what gets lost in these conversations is AI has been better at humans for a very long time at many things. Handwriting detection, diagnosis for a very long time, game playing for a very long time, mathematics since the creation of the computer, and 4 orders of magnitude better than mathematics than us. And yet, none of these things have resulted in kind of general economically viable solutions for everything. They just for subsets. Right? And so for talk about this language. So another way to rephrase what you said about the language stuff is these models are very good at predicting what a mean person would do next. A mean person would do next. So sure. They basically do kernel smoothing over positional embeddings. That great. Which means if you have a corpus of data, it'll give you the average response, which is great, and it's very useful for a number of things. Does that provide economic utility for a broad range of stuff? I mean, I'll tell you, I look at these companies basically full time and I have for 3 years. We probably have the largest portfolio of them, and I don't see that yet. Now there are areas where they do work, but it's not that. It's not this kind of general knowledge worker. That's not actually not working. And the areas where it is working is stuff like the marginal cost of content creation goes to 0. So now we have, like, amazing new content or computers are creating an emotional connection with humans. That's new and that's exciting and that's amazing. But this idea of this general knowledge worker working, I I haven't seen it yet, and maybe it'll happen. But just like self driving 20 years ago, like, that's just not how the universe tends to play out.

Nathan Labenz: (9:39) Yo. I guess, where do you think we are in self driving today? And it's been actually a couple upgrades since I took my, last ride in a Tesla FSD. This was last summer, actually. So it's been basically a year since I did it last. At that point, I was like, I think this is actually safer than the average person I drive with and probably the average person I see around me on the road who sometimes I'm like, man, how are you how did you survive long enough to get in front of me and do that? And they're not deployed at super scale. We're not quite ready to trust them. But if you believe, like, the statistics from the company and certainly my just episodic experience seems to suggest that they probably are roughly on par, maybe even better. And maybe we need maybe society's gonna demand like a 10x better to actually deploy at scale, but it seems like we're kind of there and then I guess

Martin Casado: (10:29) So I don't know if we're to their kind of unit economic, and I don't know if they're there on an exception basis. I do feel with a lot of these AI things, you enter this area where you get good enough that the economics suggest that you change the environment rather than make the AI more general. And I think this is probably best described with agriculture. So we don't have any unit economically viable way to pick strawberries. It's like human beings and animals have been forging food forever. We're very efficient at it. To actually compete with a human on that is very tough. On the other hand, what we can do is we can play strawberries in certain rows and we can add these optical cues, etcetera, that kind of get it much closer. And so I definitely think that we're at a place where, for many cases, AI is better than humans at driving, which I think is great, and I think it's a huge positive. I think these are hugely specialized systems. I don't think you can take the 1 that's good at self driving and make it, I don't know, be a virtual girlfriend. I think this is a totally different modality. So it's not general. Right? It's not general. It's just good at driving, Just like something is good at chess. And now I think we're at the long tail of the problem. For fully autonomous stuff like Waymo, the unit economics are just very tough. Right? They're very tough if you're competing with a human driver. For other ones, I do think that we if we just start evolving how we make streets and so forth, I think we're pretty close. And I think that's great. I think this is a positive for everybody.

Nathan Labenz: (11:48) Yeah. I love the narrowness of the full self driving. I actually think that's a huge plus that it is an engineered system that does 1 thing. And I also love your comment about modifying the environment. That was actually very notable even a year ago in the FSD that the places where it got tripped up, I was like, you know, the closest exit to my house off the highway has 1 of these service roads and has a stop sign. And it's genuinely quite ambiguous as to who the stop sign is for as you're getting off the highway. It's not for you as you're getting off the highway, but it's pointed right at you. And so you can understand how it would get confused about that. That's And the kind thing that if we're serious, we could just go around fixing these signs, and we'd make make it so much better.

Martin Casado: (12:30) Just quick digression, because this is just so important to this discussion on how the heavy tailed universe makes this conversation very complicated between human beings because I don't think people appreciate how heavy tailed the universe is. So I just wanna describe this because it just comes up right now and it's gonna be so relevant to what we're gonna be talking going forward, which is there are many things that systems deal with that are that are heavy tailed. What heavy tailed means is if you draw an occurrence at random, just draw 1 at random, the chances are is that it's a very rare occurrence. So a very classic case of this is search. And so if you draw a unique search query, say Google at random, the chances are it's pretty unique actually, even after all of this time. Now this is unique searches. So if you take all of the searches that go into Google, say, and then you don't dedupe them, so, like, you can have a lot of repetitive ones, the vast majority of searches are the same. Let's say 90% of them are common. But if you reduce it to just singular intents, so you don't have any duplications, the majority are exceptions. And that's how the universe tends to be. Like, I come from networking. It's a very famously heavy tailed discipline. A lot of things in the tail. So if you're building a general system, the majority of new things it has to do, not things it has to do, the majority of new things it has to do are exceptions. Now it's very easy to get tripped up in these conversations because the majority of the stuff that you're doing is not new. Right? The majority of of stuff you're doing is very common. But anytime you get into new areas, then you have to come up with new stuff. And it's like self driving is a very great case of this. Like, nobody expected basically a 2 d vision problem. Let's be honest, man. Like, self driving is 2 d. It's not even 3 d. It's looks like you have streets and you have signs. You don't really worry about the z dimension really. And yet, a $100,000,000,000 in, a 100,000,000,000 of investment, we're almost there, but not in a in an economically positive way. The reason I wanted to make this point now is I think so much of these discussions is people, I believe, underestimating how heavy tailed the universe is and how hard it is to make progress. And so we should be working as hard to make progress so that we can do stuff like self driving and not slow it down because it is the the task is enormously complex.

Nathan Labenz: (14:53) I think that's definitely a good description of where things are today. Right? In my kind of summary communications about the state of AI, I always say that the best systems are closing in on expert performance on routine tasks. And the word routine there definitely is critical. Cause when you get outside of routine tasks, they are not comparable to expert performance.

Martin Casado: (15:20) So let's let's okay. So let's move this to here. So as far as I can tell what LLMs are doing, and there's actually papers that are showing this pretty concretely, is they take a corpus of data, they create positional embeddings, they basically average over it. And based on that, they can predict what a human being would do or say given a certain situation. Right? And they do that basically via averaging. For 80% of the tasks, let's say that's great. This is for 80% as non unique. Right? So you're not deducing tasks. But let me give you analogy. What if I came to you? I'm I'm a startup founder. I'm like, hey, Nathan, I've got this amazing chatbot that for IT help tickets, it answers 90% of the time. And you're like, this is amazing. Like, 90% of the work goes away. Right? This is what you say. But then you actually do diligence on my company and you realize that 90% of that, 85% of that is just answering password resets. So I was factually correct saying that 90% gets answered. That's the case. But the reality is the situations that I help with are very easy to automate if you wanted to and they're not that much work. And you still have, from a unique standpoint, you still have to have humans do 50% of the unique things that come in. 50%. Right? So that was the state of chatbots for the last 10 years. And we had the exact same discussions. They seem to answer 90%. They answer 85%. They can do these things. We're almost done. But that's not how heavy tail distributions work. So let's again, so let's go to this case that you're making. A 100% these LLMs solve problems we couldn't before. And a 100% they're a very useful computer science primitive. We're nowhere close to understanding what these distributions look like, how heavy tailed they are, and how they can handle that tail. Just like we weren't with AV, just like we weren't with original chatbots. And so I just think that without being specific on uniqueness and the distribution and whether we think it's parametric. It's very hard to have these conversations. So we result in generalities that sound good, but I think from a system standpoint aren't very sensible.

Nathan Labenz: (17:39) How far do you think this goes? Like, best guess, if you are imagining yourself in 2027, do and you have your AI assistant. Can you say, hey. I'm going to, New York next week for this event. Here's the invitation. Book me a flight. Book me a hotel. And get a good result?

Martin Casado: (18:00) I think it's gonna be like self driving. I think we'll get 80% there with these agentic systems and then people are gonna start changing the environment to make them more effective because human output is also heavy tailed. And so my best guess, again, I'm gonna repeat myself, I actually think this is how it's gonna play out is, right now, anytime we're always at like beginning of what looks like an exponential, but is actually a sigmoid and what we think is like a fat head system but ends a heavy tail system. It almost feels like this. Like it feels right now and everybody's saying all the stuff that they're saying right now. And we're like, it's amazing. You know, everything's gonna work out and then we're gonna realize, oh my goodness, the universe is heavy tailed. This is really hard. These things go to 80% of stuff, but the 80% of stuff that it's good at is not that hard. And the stuff that I need it to be good at is really hard. And so then we're going to enter an area that we're like, oh, boy, we talked about scaling laws, throwing 10 times more compute at something over a period of time is so impossible that what we're gonna do is we're gonna actually change the way websites work and we're gonna actually have indicators and we're actually gonna have lanes. And then we're gonna get spend the time actually changing the systems. And so over time between changing the way websites work and where these agents work, we'll enter a period where these things are more autonomous. But I don't think it's because we've cracked the generality problem. I think it's because we've evolved computer science as a discipline and tech and software as an industry in order to solve the problem.

Nathan Labenz: (19:23) I find language to be a confusing domain in some ways because there is so much it's hard to get truly out of distribution in, like, interesting ways. It can write a sonnet about the NBA finals or whatever, and it's that's definitely out of distribution, but you could say it's interpolating between things in distribution. Sometimes I'd like to just go, like, to things that humans can't do. So when I look at things like EVO, the early foundation model for DNA sequencing, it's an interesting 1. And there's another I did an episode just yesterday on models for basically simulating solutions like salt solutions.

Martin Casado: (20:03) Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (20:03) And in both of these cases, you see these sort of remarkable generalization moments where in the EVO case, it's trained on DNA sequence data just like bacteria and phage data. And they so it's it's next token prediction. It's the next base pair prediction. Same thing as a language model. Right? So you could say, oh, it's only predicting the next base pair. But like the language models, it seems to have developed these higher order internal representations that mean something that it was not specifically trained to learn, but that it's like learned in service of making the next base pair prediction. And 1 of the experiments that they did that is so striking to me, this is from the ARC Institute. They did what they call gene essentiality scoring, where they basically say, we'll give you a gene sequence and we'll perturb it. And then we'll look at your perplexity, your being the model, your level of confidence or uncertainty downstream of that prediction. If you remain confident, then we can believe that gene must not be super essential. Because if it gets messed up, then you can still predict, like, how this fits into life. But if you if we make that change and then you become very radically unconfident in your downstream predictions, then we can infer that this gene is actually really important because now when it's off, now you recognize you're out of distribution and you can't make any

Martin Casado: (21:25) Mhmm.

Nathan Labenz: (21:25) Confident predictions anymore.

Martin Casado: (21:27) Mhmm.

Nathan Labenz: (21:27) It seems to me like that signals and that's like a 7,000,000,000 parameter model, 300,000,000,000 tokens. That's 2% of what LAMA or 1 and a 1 and a half percent of what LAMA 3 is trained on. So it does feel like there's some potential in these systems to learn things that we don't know, to grok, if you will, patterns in the universe that are not known to anyone really to essentially speak DNA. Yeah. So if you buy all that, how do you backport that to language? Because I feel like

Martin Casado: (22:03) You do.

Nathan Labenz: (22:03) I start to see, well, you know, just modeling the economy or modeling software. I do start to see things. If you were to train, keep scaling and keep training these models on distributed systems or software or whatever, how do we know that they don't start to to learn things that people don't know and truly generalize beyond the training set? Because it does seem like that's happening in some profound way.

Martin Casado: (22:24) I think that's a great question. I I think maybe this is why I come to this from a different thing. Prior to my PhD, like, my life was computational physics. I worked at Lawrence Livermore National Lab. I did large physics simulation. Like, I just lived this life. And I think the Occam's razor in all of this is distribution in, distribution out. These things are very good at learning distributions of of the training set. And so this is just in this kind of weird quirky coincidence of this moment. I actually worked on protein folding at IBM T. G. Watson Research Center in 1999 on the BlueJeans project. And at that time there was a belief that we knew enough of the fundamental forces in order to actually from first principles calculate protein folding. That was the thesis and that we just didn't have enough compute. And so they actually built a whole computer to do this called Blue Gene and through corporate machinations that ended up becoming an entirely new computer because they couldn't fund it. It never really happened. But there was the belief that if you had enough compute that you could do protein folding and a bunch of other stuff. And so I think it's very reasonable. This is just strict Occam's razor that if you have enough compute and you have enough data and you're dealing with an axiomatic system that you can reduce to first principles, then you will learn that distribution and you can use it for predictive stuff. And if you wanna call predictive emergent, that's fine, but it's just predictive, like anything is predictive. Like, I've worked on simulations codes that were predictive. Could I have predicted the yield of a nuclear weapon? No. I could not have predicted that as a human being. Only a computer can, but it's really just understanding first principles to create these things. I very strongly believe these models are are very useful in science where you've got fundamental laws of nature that are being learned that can be predictive. I think the models that are good at that is not gonna turn around and solve a different problem most likely because I think you've probably learned 1 distribution from what domain, and that's a very useful tool that we should use. Now let's let's let's go ahead and move that over to language now. So if my Occam's razor is these things learn structure in a data corpus, it's distribution in, distribution out, that means that they're learning structure of of the text corpus that that they've they've been they've been fed. And a great example of this, there's a recent paper I saw, I don't know if it got accepted or not, think it was just on archive, but that showed that if you could g zip a text corpus and the g and the compression was good, then, like, the accuracy was good, which suggests almost everything you need to know about this, that all it's doing is learning structure in the text. It has nothing to do with underlying meaning. It's just structure that's in the text. So you can understand the distribution of text. You can actually spit out text, but this doesn't say anything about learning fundamental principles of the world from which the text is based. And so it almost seems to be that the magic in this sequence of text is you've got these humans that have spent, say, 3000 years looking at the universe. And the universe is again heavy tailed and it's non linear and it's very complex and it's fractal and it's self similar and these are notoriously complicated systems to simulate. So then the human brain is like, I'm gonna abstract this out as a tree, and I'm gonna abstract this out as like this concept. And so we're like these machines that take the universe and abstract into things that are worth, but it's a very lossy representation. You can't describe something and get back the universe. But it turns out because we have those abstractions, they're very predictable. Like, we've made the universe more linear, and we've made the universe less heavy tailed, and we've made the universe less self similar. And once we've done that, we've added structure that's predictable. So the fact that you can take a corpus of text, which a human being has pulled from the universe and then made the universe much simpler and find structure in that is not surprising at all. But to think then somehow then you can go from that to the universe is a step that, like, just simply has not been demonstrated. And it actually it doesn't even stand to reason.

Nathan Labenz: (26:28) Hey. We'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

Nathan Labenz: If I understood you correctly, you're saying, like, that doesn't mean that they have any understanding of meaning. How would you square that with, like, a sparse autoencoder or line of research or sort of Golden Gate Claude, if you will? Like, they they're able to now say through these sparse encoder sparse autoencoder techniques that they can isolate, I think it's 30 some million different features, each of which is a direction in activation space and then inject those at runtime. Right? And then they're starting to create these sort of control mechanisms where it's if they jack up a golden gate bridge feature, then all it wants to talk about is golden gate bridge. Sure. Or more practically, insert kindness or insert, you know, deviousness or whatever.

Martin Casado: (27:14) Right.

Nathan Labenz: (27:14) There seems to be some meaning there. Right?

Martin Casado: (27:17) There's structure. That's very different than meaning. So the we're talking about 3 things. This and this is a great conversation because I think it gets to the heart of it. So the universe is self similar. It's fractal. Meaning, no matter what zoom level you look at it, it has the same stochastic properties. Right? So like you can spend an entire life studying a cell and a planet. Right? That's how much complexity is in the universe. Universe is heavy tailed, which means the exception is the norm if you dedup. And it's nonlinear, which means that you can't computationally predict out too far just because we don't know, we don't have closed form solutions for nonlinear stuff and it's just a very hard computations problem. That's the universe. Now human beings have had to navigate this crazy universe. And so we've created this amazing engine which is the brain. And it has reduced this universe to concepts and words and stuff that we use and we talk about that kind of makes it a little bit predictable. And so at least you and I can communicate about it. But if I tell you like this is a tree, there's a concept tree in my brain, but it's almost an arbitrary distinction that it's a tree. I could say talk about branches versus leaves. I could talk about networks of trees. That's actually 1 tree like the big Aspen Grove. I could talk about cells of the tree. It's like this kind of arbitrarily useful distinction. So it has some semblance to the real world. But if I say a tree, it's probably not inaccurate relative to how the the world is. Is it 1 tree? Is it a family tree? It's just a useful abstraction. So these models will a 100% recover the abstractions that we've put in text because the structure is all there. That's not surprising. Like, compression would do that. All it's doing is taking advantage of structure and that structure is real. But let's say that it's finding a tree. Is it does a tree actually map to the universe in a meaningful way? It's a human created concept that has some vague semblance to something we all agree on. Unless you're a scientist, then you probably disagree with the the the common understanding. And oh, by the way, my concept of a tree also includes, like, a toy and a cartoon picture of a tree, which is entirely different. Right? And so text is a way that we as humans represent the world that's very different than the actual universe because we find it useful. There's structure there. And these LLMs are exploiting that structure just like compression would or anything else. And it's very useful for us, but it doesn't necessarily mean that these things can enact on on the world. Right? These are very different domains.

Nathan Labenz: (29:49) Yeah. I guess I'm not quite getting the gap. There's so many interesting results to point to recently. Did you see the 1 GPT-four finding and exploiting new 0 day exploits? This was just in the last week or 2. So and it's increasingly impossible to keep up with everything, so I don't expect you've seen everything.

Martin Casado: (30:06) But no. That 1 I have. I think when you're dealing with this much compute and this much data, I think the human intuition just totally fails. And and like we as humans are really bad about thinking in distributions anyway. That's not how we think. We kind of assume the world is parametric. And by the way, which is why the text that we create is so well structured and we can be exploited by LLMs. Like, you have to navigate this universe. You have to make the simplifying assumptions, which we do. And so it's good to actually come up with mental frameworks about how these things work. So I'll I'll tell you a few of mine. The first 1 of mine is, as far as I can tell, these things are exploiting structure in whatever data that they're reading. And like we've mentioned before, and it's not clear whether that distributions extends beyond that. And if it does, then you're basically back to simulating the universe, which again, I've spent a lot of time with. I think that's very tough. The second 1 is the actual mechanisms. If we're talking about transformers, the actual mechanism is is basically kernel smoothing. It's it's averaging, which means to me is the further you get out in to where the data is rare, the greater the inaccuracies come. And that doesn't mean that for systems that you can actually extrapolate from, that you don't get great results. That would be quote, unquote out of distribution. It turns out some systems are linear or you have enough data, you can map the distribution. So that 1 is totally fine. Then the third 1 is this in context learning 1. And I think Vishal Misra, who's a professor at Columbia, did the best work on this where he actually shows that for in context learning where you actually put the context in the prompt and you can move the posterior distribution to get interesting results, he mapped it specifically to Bayesian learning. And and it's beautiful paper. I don't know why more people don't read it. So listen, we know that these things can do some basic Bayesian reasoning. And this is where the prompt is basically the new evidence, which changes the posterior function. So you'll get new stuff there. We know that if you average enough stuff, you'll get new stuff there. It just has to be linearly interpolatable. If it's not linearly interpolatable, you're not gonna get new stuff. So none of these things suggest that you're not gonna get new stuff. It just puts constraints. We know how Bayesian systems work. We've got 20 years of understanding convergence properties to them. We have a work that's specifically mapped ICL to Bayesian learning. So let's just go ahead and use that corpus of work to understand the properties. It doesn't say it's out of distribution or in distribution. It doesn't say that at all. It just bounds what that means. And then we also know the mechanics of the way transformers works, which is this kernel smooth I mean, it's it's more complex than that. And so that can create new things, but it means there's a linear interpolation. And so I I think the problem is we have these anecdotal conversations where it's whack a mole. It feels like, almost like the intelligent design discussions where someone will come up with a new set of evidence of something that there's no way evolution could have created this. Have to spend all of this time to show, actually, you can, but we don't know everything and here's the theory. And I I feel like when we have these discussions, they should be a bit more principled as opposed to, I've got this anecdote that seems something's new because nobody says that you're not gonna see new stuff. I mean, it's very obviously if you're doing inter interpolation, it's new. Very obvious if you're doing Bayesian reasoning, like something's gonna be new and talk more about the distributions and the theory of why we're doing that. But as far as I can tell, that's totally missing. Nobody's come and said, here's my theory of out of distribution stuff. Here is my thesis for what is going on functionally to create this new data. And on the other hand, you've got mounting and tons of evidence that map these to existing systems that we know, that people just seem to not want to follow. I just feel like, listen, humans love to see things in clouds and complex systems. There's so many facets and they're so complicated and they're so huge and they're so ethereal and then we see things and we just do this historically and we've got these kind of amazing compute elements that are huge and they surprise us and they're amazing, but we can map them to formal systems and we know how they work. And that doesn't mean that they're dangerous or not dangerous. I'm not saying that. I'm just saying that we can actually map them to reasonable systems to have a discussion and that just seems to be missing. This conversation is a great example. I'm very happy to map these things to formal systems. We understand and have that discussion, but it's always this kind of anecdotal whack a mole instead, which I just don't know how to answer to every instance of what seems like emergent behavior when, of course, emergent behavior is expected anyways.

Nathan Labenz: (34:22) Hey. We'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

Nathan Labenz: I'm definitely a materialist, and so I do believe that in the fullness of time, we can probably figure out an arbitrary level of detail how these things work. They're actually way easier to study than life, for example.

Martin Casado: (34:39) Of course. Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (34:40) And I would say we've made tremendous progress in interpretability and just general understanding. That paper you mentioned is a great example. I've seen another 1 too that pretty similar where somebody designed a a matrix implementation of gradient descent and then looked for that in the wild and found it. It's like, look. These things have learned to implement gradient descent at runtime, and that's another kind of mechanism at least sometimes. Probably have different mechanisms and different models, and there's this various, almost like phase change type of dynamics that are being explored too where even for something as simple as, like, the modular addition, there's, like, multiple algorithms that it can lock into, each of which work, but they're different. And so there's memorization and then there's multiple, like, actual algorithmic solves and which 1 you end up with depends on initial conditions. So I don't think there's any magic in the machine. I'm definitely with you on on that. It does seem that in principle, should be able to figure it all out. Doesn't seem like we're we've made a lot of progress, but it doesn't seem like we're that close to having it all figured out. On the on the sigmoid question, I I tend to also agree that it does not seem like there's reason to believe that this is gonna be an exponential forever. It does seem like it probably levels off. But then I'm also reminded of the old joke of 2 guys in the woods and the bear is coming and the one's putting on his shoes. And he says, I don't have to outrun

Martin Casado: (36:01) the bear. I just

Nathan Labenz: (36:02) have to outrun you. And so I do wonder if we imagine continuing to scale up as we have been scaling up and there's all these trend lines and x times more compute and however much advantage from algorithmic efficiency and whatever. I was just talking to somebody at generally 1 of the top 5 hyperscalers in the world, and they are using a new replacement for the Atom optimizer that is giving them, like, something like 30% savings on compute. This was published open source, but the technique is called Sofia. And it's just, like, incredible. You're 30% off the top. You're saving, like, a $100,000,000 on the biggest runs. Anyway, let's imagine we continue to scale up and it's a few more orders of magnitude. And let's say we don't just put in the text, but we also put in, like, this sort of low level solution data and the protein, you know, the DNA data and the protein and the gene expression and we work our way up all these levels of orders of magnitude. And then it's like computer systems, like all the cloud logs from AWS and Google Cloud and all this stuff gets in there and you've got all these different self similar but overlapping orders of magnitude of ways of understanding the world.

Martin Casado: (37:12) Mhmm.

Nathan Labenz: (37:13) Even if it asymptotes or levels off at some point, I have a hard time imagining that doesn't level off at a higher point than human is able to achieve today. But I feel like you probably see that differently still.

Martin Casado: (37:26) So a lot of this reduces to how you view the universe. If you don't view the universe as fractal self similar, and if you don't view it as heavy tailed, and if you don't view it as nonlinear, then you could imagine that. But it is all of those things. We know it is all of those things. And so there's no distribution of data that we know of that's not the universe that will produce something that's predictive of the universe. It's really that simple. Now, that doesn't mean that we can't focus on an area and reproduce that distribution. I could become very good at predicting whatever protein folding. I could get really good at playing chess. But it's distribution in distribution out. If you notice the ones that like stuff like recursive self similarity works and control loops work and simulated data works, like synthetic data works, there are these axiomatic areas where the axioms, like they constrain the search space and you're basically converging on search. And you can get very good at those. I can get much better at unit arithmetic. I can get much better than you at game playing. I can get much better at humans at all of these things. But none of that talks to the fact that can you find the right level of abstraction in a fractal system and can you tackle a heavy tailed universe where not by occurrence, but by uniqueness, the complexities in the tail. Even in this discussion, the use cases that you view tend to be these kind of axiomatic, you know, of course we can do full search. Like we thought in the late nineties we could do protein folding by fully searching the search space. It's just not surprising to me that we can learn distributions and spit them out. I I feel that's a very different statement than saying, now we have a model that can navigate the universe in a way that is predictive of all of the complexities of it. Maybe another way to think of this is we spent 3000 years doing our best in writing it down, and we can create a model that can learn from all of that and do what the mean human being would have done in the last 3000 years. But the problem is the stuff that we're doing tomorrow by uniqueness, a lot of it's gonna be new. And that's just how the universe works, and we're gonna have to either build a machine that can do that, which we don't know how to do, or we're gonna have to do it ourselves and let these machines do the mean task.

Nathan Labenz: (39:48) So do you have an account of or theory of what it is that you think humans are doing that the models can't do today?

Martin Casado: (39:57) I mean, 2 things. 1 of them and the most important 1 is we experience the universe and we abstract it into concepts. Like, that's very common. Like, why do you think all the budget is moving to post training, by way? What's your thesis of why so much budget right now is moving from compute to post training?

Nathan Labenz: (40:13) Ease of use is a huge 1. Would I still guess it's probably a minority of budget if you're talking like I don't know. Llama 3,

Martin Casado: (40:21) is it?

Nathan Labenz: (40:21) Llama 3? Llama 3. Moron I

Martin Casado: (40:24) don't know. Listen. They had they said they had 10,000,000 messages. I know how much multi pass costs. Let's say it costs $15. Like, we're talking a budget between $102,100,000,000, which anecdotally, it seems about right based on what I know of the industry. But, yeah, that's about half. And so what I would argue is we're very good. Models are very good at taking the output that humans create and being able to reproduce that distribution. They're very good at that. This is why Scale AI is Scale AI and all these all these companies are so successful. That's not the game. The game is looking at the universe and creating the supervised data. That's the game. And so I think 1 model to look at this is, again, human beings have been around, let's say, in a in a capacity for writing things down for 5000 years. So you've got humans for 5000 years that have been looking at the universe and doing this thing that models cannot do, which is making a decision like that is a rock, and that is a dust, and this is a concept, and this is a relationship, and I'm gonna write it down. And then as a group, we're gonna synthesize these ideas and work at these. And so we've got this kind of almost kind of platonic representation in our heads of the universe, and that is very structured. So we did all the hard work. That is hard work to take this untamed universe and reduce it into words and concept. That's hard. No LLM that I know can do that. I'm not even close. But then once we've done all of that hard work, is it surprising to you that there's structure? We did all this work. Of course, there's structure. So you take that structure, you put into an LLM, it learns the structure, and it can spit it back out. So the very specific thing that these LLMs can't do is look at the universe and recreate this kind of structure. It's and that and to be super clear, that structure is not the universe. That's very different. Like a rock is a rock. It is an idea in our head. It's not representative of any single thing. Is it a grain of sand rock? I don't know. Is it a boulder rock? I don't know. These are concepts we've created in order to navigate the universe. They're not the universe. So human beings take the universe and create the concepts. And the LLM and then that's structured because we need structure in order to do anything. Structure. Feels like the only thing that works is basically you can do exhaustive quote unquote AI which converges on search to learn distributions or you do supervised learning which human beings are doing the hard work in my opinion by labeling things and everything else, and then you just learn what the human beings have done. But to take the universe and actually to rein structure and all that complexity, that's what we do. And it would be great if if machines can do it. I've never seen any evidence that can. Yeah. May maybe some glimmers up, but that's just not where we are.

Nathan Labenz: (43:05) Yeah. I think the

Martin Casado: (43:06) So it might be I just wanna be super quick because you guys have be a very specific question. We very specific answer. Look at the universe and then come up with these concepts that are useful, that are not the universe. They're concepts. They're totally separate. Like, a rock is not a thing. It's a human concept. But to take the universe and decide something is a rocket, that's actually all of the complexity and all of the energy is that step, which LLMs just don't do.

Nathan Labenz: (43:28) Yes. This is why I think the language is such a tricky domain. By the way, the platonic representation, you probably saw there's a paper entitled exactly that recently. But it doesn't tell us much about this particular question because it is still operating in the language domain and it is in that way able to piggyback on our prior art in terms of useful abstraction of the universe. I do think if there was a line of research where I would venture a guess that I think you maybe wouldn't agree with that maybe where we could come back in a certain finite amount of time and say, has this happened or not and what would we infer from it? I probably would look at this biology foundation model space and the sequence modeling. And you can imagine there's that's gonna be elaborated a lot. They didn't even use eukaryotic, sequences in that initial EVO paper, let alone, like, expression data, transcriptome, proteome, whatever.

Martin Casado: (44:27) We know enough about the natural sciences to build predictive models and we have for a very long time. Right? Like, I can simulate a supernova on a computer pretty accurately. I think it's phenomenal. The the it's phenomenal that we have an approach to throw a computer to a problem that learning a fundamental law of physics. But again, how is that any different than the fact that we've been modeling physical systems for a very long time other than the fact that in these cases, it allows us to apply more compute at the problem and we can solve problems that we don't have closed form analytics solutions to. It almost feels to me like an extensive of simulation, which would be very different than the claims around general reasoning. It's literally learning laws of physics, which we've been doing since the beginning of compute. Right? The the creation of computers was for ballistics. Right? So the reason that we created computers is because ballistics are nonlinear. Right? The trajectory of ballistics are nonlinear. So we had people in rooms that would create logarithm tables by hand. They were called computers. That's where the name came from. Any act shows up. Any act does it. 4 orders of magnitude. It's about 5,000 times faster than a human being does it. And we have a computer. And this is a perfect example of a non linear system, which is a trajectory with gravity being done by a computer. Why is this not just a a straightforward extension of exactly that like we've been doing for the last 80 years?

Nathan Labenz: (45:54) Here's my expectation. Tell me if you maybe that we could make a little, friendly wager on this.

Martin Casado: (45:59) Yeah. Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (45:59) I think that over the next year, we are going to start to see scaled up foundation models for biology that are going to start to understand the super complicated interactions between genes, between proteins in cells in ways that are inferred from inputs and outputs, learning these higher order concepts in the middle Yeah. Which we could not simulate because it's computationally, you know, just intractable and which we certainly don't have a closed form solution for either.

Martin Casado: (46:36) I agree.

Nathan Labenz: (46:37) If that does happen, that would seem to constitute to me an instance of looking at the world, looking at basically raw data of sequences and just lysed cells and what proteins are found in them and whatever and learning meaningful abstractions. And I would expect that we'll start to discover stuff by doing counterfactual experiments on those models. In other words, tweak a thing, see what happens. Find medicines, find disease patterns by make a tweak, see what happens. What if we change this counterfactually and then go validate those things in the wet lab? If we start to see that happening, would that to you represent

Martin Casado: (47:15) I agree. Phenomenon? I fully expect that. Listen. But how does that not

Nathan Labenz: (47:19) constitute looking at the universe and figuring out what's what?

Martin Casado: (47:23) Oh, 0, for sure. For sure. For specialized subdomains, you absolutely can learn distributions. A 100%. Right? Listen. I've implemented Navier Stokes, like fluid dynamics where and this is a turbulent chaotic system. So we've known how to, like, implement very complex systems with computers for sure. And especially in the very specific domains where we can reduce these things to a few fundamental forces or we can reduce these things to mostly linear systems. Like the the previous version of this is just all the computational methods where we would kind of take a problem that we know and we'd actually experimentally determine like it says experimentally, we'd say, okay, material behaves this way under this pressure and this heat and has these properties. And we take what we learn experimentally and we'd create these models and they would do pretty good at simulation. And I would say there's a very straightforward extension of that, which is you look at how the world works in a constrained situation, and then you can predict what would happen in the constrained situation. But just like simulations remember, we could do this with simulation. We've been able to do this for a very long time. Right? So you could experimentally determine like how different materials work and then you can actually simulate a new system based on those. This is how we do most industrial design today anyways. So my question to you is how is this fundamentally different than that or not a a natural extension than that where you're giving it a system, you're learning some fundamental properties, you can do something new, but that doesn't mean that you can disobey the laws of physics in predicting stuff that computers can't predict. It's not obvious to me that it can simulate complex nonlinear systems that are chaotic for long periods of time. I think this is just yet another step on this kind of like we have computers simulate physical stuff and we're simulating the next thing with the next tool. Does does the parallel making make sense? If you go to like in the eighties and nineties, we would literally empirically test physical matter. We didn't know how the physical matter worked. Just empirically tested. We'd have it has this opacity under this heat. It has this tensile strength. We'd use that to build databases of materials, equations of state we call them. So this is how they interoperate. We'd use those when we're doing simulations and we'd simulate what happens when a car explodes, what happens if an airplane runs into a building, like all of these things. None of those instances work. They were simulations and they were very accurate. And none of them came from like first principles, they are all empirically. But that that has its limits because it didn't solve climate prediction past 15 days. It didn't allow us to to simulate life. And so to me, this is just computers being attached to another domain, which thank goodness we've come up with a great tool that's gonna give us a little bit more insight. But it's a little bit more insight is what it is. By the way, we have the same discussions in the simulation. This is why, by the way, we stopped PlayStations from going to the Middle East. It was exactly this. Again, So I worked I actually worked in the nuclear weapons program at Livermore. So I I was very close to the previous version of these discussions. Like, oh my goodness. If Saddam Hussein gets PlayStations, he's gonna be able to simulate nuclear weapons. Right? Like, just totally misunderstanding that the ability to simulate something is not some runaway process that's gonna allow you to recreate a world or anything like that. It's a very specific tool for a very specific situation. But we were here before when it was 25 years ago.

Nathan Labenz: (50:54) Yeah. There's certainly no arguing that past predictions of AI progress often didn't pan out, and that does seem like it's, not a near term future that we can dismiss either.

Martin Casado: (51:06) The other argument is that they have all panned out exactly as you'd expect and they're gonna continue to. And this has been steady progress for 80 years and it's been a super useful tool. And every time we unlock something, people are like, oh, pooh, that wasn't AGI, so that must not have been AI. And they're like focused on the wrong goal and it's very unspecified goal. And instead, it's like any other computer science primitive where it keeps solving problems and we should continue to solve problems with it, which is the way that I would view it. It's interesting because people talk about summers and winters and not panning out like you just did, but it couldn't be further from the truth. It's been a foundational primitive of computer science that we've been using very effectively and we continue to use more effectively. And I don't see why that won't just continue to be the case.

Nathan Labenz: (51:47) Yeah. I like your vision. I think what you're describing is almost an ideal scenario. And also stop.

Martin Casado: (51:55) But I

Nathan Labenz: (51:55) do think this is an important foundation. Let me try to bottom line your perspective. Yeah. I'm still a little confused around what would count. Is there what would be the evidence of if the fundamental thing that humans can do and have done through our history that the AIs can't do is look at the universe and figure out the right abstractions and come up with the right concepts that compress it in order to make sense of it? And I agree. It's very hard to say what they're doing in the language domain because we already did that work and they're learning it from us. I try to describe something in the biology domain where it's like, seems like they're starting to show signs of doing that and I could believe that they would and then you sort of agreed, but then now I'm confused as to wouldn't that count as doing that? And then it seemed like response as well that's just in 1 domain, but it doesn't seem like there's anything that would prevent that. Certainly, there's a huge leap in generality with this latest generation of systems. So I I do imagine just shoveling all the modalities into 1 model. We've already got text, vision, and audio in GPT-four o. Why not the true GPT-five o would be like biology data and weather data and like pictures of deep space and solutions simulations and just battery simulations, material science, whatever. Throw that all into 1 thing. And if it can do that, then it's definitely not going to be constrained by 1 domain anymore. So I'm still a little lost as to like exactly what the limit that you see is in terms

Martin Casado: (53:16) of why it doesn't become

Nathan Labenz: (53:17) a system that's more powerful than people.

Martin Casado: (53:19) I'm so glad you reduced it to this. I think this is great. Right? And there's 2 things. There's this notion that language reasoning is general, which a lot of people believe, but you don't seem to be on that kind of kick. So let's put that 1 aside. And you're more on the, like, learning properties and simulating properties of the universe side, which is totally fine. So what I would do is I would just bring you back to everything we've learned about simulation, which is even when you know all of the properties of the system and you can simulate, you just don't have the computational capacity to simulate nonlinear systems. We don't have the materials or the energy or anything. It's it's literally like a compute problem. We have code bases that have been around for 20, 30 years that simulate all sorts of crazy stuff, and yet they've got limited utility for exactly this reason. The universe is just so complex that they're useful for a little bit. And so if it turns out, and I'll I'll give you a very specific 1 that we can bet. Listen, if it turns out that these models somehow change that compute trade off where it can simulate nonlinear systems in ways that traditional stuff can't, I'm I'm a 100% with you. But that's not what they're doing. What they're doing is they're inferring stuff that we haven't been able to infer by looking at data. That doesn't mean that they can be predictive in a way that kind of disobeys our understanding of compute requirements. And like a Raleigh Taylor let me just give you a specific so Raleigh Taylor instability is basically if you have 2 liquids that are on top of each other with different densities and that is 1 Raleigh Taylor unstable system. And if you perturb it, like you get these kind of like just amazing kind of chaotic turbulent things that happen. We have been looking at this problem for 30 years and we have no idea how to actually predict what will happen. We just know roughly what they will look like, but we don't know like the specifics. And AI systems are way less efficient than an actual like code written for simulation. So to think that it can tackle those types of problems, I just don't see any indication. I mean, I view that we have these kind of modalities of compute that we can throw up problems. Right? So the most efficient is basically imperative programming where you give the computer a set of instructions and exactly the the rules. Right? So that's just normal programming. And then we have another modality which is declarative programming. And by the way, the first one's the most efficient. Right? It just does the rules. The second 1 is like the end state that you want. I know the end state, but you know it very specifically. And then the computer figures out what to do. This is declarative programming. And so to come to the solution, it has to do all of the logical closure stuff, so that requires more compute. Right? And we don't even know how to bound that compute. That's why, like, databases, when you run queries, are not bounded. So that's declarative programming. Now we're in AI where you don't even know what the end state is. You're just like, I have a whole bunch of data, and I want you to find patterns in that data. Right? That requires even more compute, so it's even less efficient. So it's another modality of compute. It's 1 we've been refining for a long time, but it doesn't change the nature of computers. There's still systems and there's still computers, and they still have the same limitations independent of what distribution that they learn. And so if it turns out that these things can like simulate systems for a period of time longer than normal simulation, then I'm with you. I'm like, this is this is breaking the laws of physics. But until then, it feels to me like simulation where you just don't know all of the rules, but it's learning some of the rules.

Nathan Labenz: (56:50) Yeah. I guess I I think about it less in terms of simulation and more in terms of how effective the choice of actions can be at any given time step. Like, I'm not simulating the universe. Humanity as a whole is not simulating the universe, but we're all just taking our local conditions and our sort of general sense of our own selves and goals and trying to do the next step at any given time. And it seems like our overall efficacy through our lives is the integral, if you will, over how good our choices are at each given time step. And that doesn't depend on any huge simulation of anything like irreducibly complex. So then if I imagine an AI, it it seems within reach to imagine an AI that can do something very similar to what I'm doing, which is have a goal, look at its immediate surroundings, look at what it just did, look at whatever other context it may be given, and pick a next action and potentially be better than me at it and potentially quite a bit better. And then that to me seems like enough. If it can do that, then I feel like we're in an environment where we now have fundamentally pretty alien and not super well understood things that can take more effective actions in many given contexts than I could. And then that to me is like where I start to turn the conversation toward what sort of safeguards should we have in place.

Martin Casado: (58:18) Just getting because this is these conversations tend to be so modeled. If that action requires interacting with the physical world, it has to simulate the physical world. It just does. Right? Like, it has to understand, like, dynamics and ballistics. It has to understand what happens if someone throws a rock at it or if it's like in water or if the weather is like I I mean, that's how you navigate the physical world. It's really why we created computers. Right? It was because these are very hard things to do. And then if it's not that, if it's not interacting with the physical world, then it is interacting in this kind of language domain that we've created. And I agree it'd be very good at some subset of those things. There's 0 indication it'd be good at new things. And that's what we're actually very good at. And again, without actually having a model for all of these things that we understand like the distributions, we understand the mechanisms, I feel like we just use words and the words all make sense. But like complex systems, we never know convergence and divergence without actually specifying the system. I feel like for these conversations, we just don't have a system we talk about. And so it's always we live in the world of like rectangles and arrows and somebody takes a rectangle and they have an arrow that goes back to the rectangle. They're like, Ah, we've got a virtuous cycle without actually specifying that if you have diminishing marginal returns, you don't go anywhere or you're doing the same stuff or whatever. And so I think this is incumbent on all of us to actually understand the systems we're working with and then come up with these basic views and properties to make sure at least we understand what the convergence properties are. I'm sorry. That was a very muddled thing to say. But I feel that until we talk about specifics, it's very hard to make concrete statements in this.

Nathan Labenz: (59:57) Yeah. It's tough. We're in a tough environment because things are moving really quick and we are pre paradigmatic, right, on understanding a lot of these things. Again, I think the progress has been incredible, but we're just starting to correct Okay. The black So let's change gears because I think this is probably certainly gives everybody enough to to get at least a good intuition for our relative philosophies on this. Yep. So what do you think we should do right now in practical terms to regulate AI, if anything?

Martin Casado: (1:00:30) The regulation 1 is sticky for to me for 2 reasons. The first 1 is we don't even have a definition of AI. And so I think it reduces to regulating software. And then for that, I would say we've been regulating software for a very long time and there's a broad robust discourse around that. And I think we should make whatever conversations we have part of that broader discussion.

Nathan Labenz: (1:00:53) So yeah, just trying to bring a couple different lenses to this from existing rules. We obviously have liability rules for all kinds of products, just software. It seems like there is a general kind of trade off that companies make with the government where it's like, we wanna have safe products that we can generally count on as being safe. Companies don't wanna be sued every 2 seconds, and the the general trade is like, you agree to implement some standards. If you implement those standards, you'll be shielded from regulation. And that does vary, right, across, like, lots of different product types. You know, cars are very different from milk and so on and so forth. But we don't have anything really like that for AI and not a ton really for software either. You probably know better than I do in terms of some, like, niche areas of

Martin Casado: (1:01:39) I mean, cars have lot of software.

Nathan Labenz: (1:01:41) Cars are increasing software products.

Martin Casado: (1:01:42) And airplanes have a lot of software in them, and medical devices have a lot of software in them.

Nathan Labenz: (1:01:47) So in in all these regimes, there's tons of testing. There's tons of verification. They are engineered and demonstrated to a standard. But we don't have those, like, standards really for these AI systems Sure. Yet.

Martin Casado: (1:01:58) Don't know what the distinction between AI and software is. I really don't. Like, I I have seen the definition used in these regulations. It's so broad that really could include all non trivial software. And I don't say this to be a polemic, and I don't say this to be difficult. I'm saying this very clearly. They literally say a system that can, whatever, navigate and change a virtual or physical system. I mean, these are so broad. Right? So we're really talking about software. That's what we're really talking about. We have, what, 70 years of history regulating software in many domains. And I think that regulation's very important. I'm not a libertarian. I'm a lifelong liberal. Like, I'm a very moderate person. I'm just saying this discourse has been around for a very long time, and we should continue. And if there's an area that software's being pushed, an area that we need to have some sort of protections, we should add them to it. Right? But that's a very different statement than a saying AI is somehow paradigmatically different. There's just like literally 0 indication that it is. And then try to somehow regulate a computer science prim that's like regulating a database. Let me give you like a specific example because I so by the way, we went through this during the the rise of the web and the Internet. And so a lot of my formal studies were networking, and so I was actually pretty close to these discussions. And at the time, there was this concern that with the rise of the web and the Internet, you have actual paradigmatic shift. It's not just software, it's different. And we actually had examples, like the morris worm had taken out a whole bunch of stuff, we were running critical infrastructure on it, and there was this notion of asymmetry, which actually changed the defense posture of The United States. And the notion of asymmetry is the more that you bought onto the technology, the more vulnerable you were. So as opposed to mutually assured destruction, which was our doctrine before, we now had this new thing which is like, oh my goodness, we're the most vulnerable because we've adopted this. So you had 2 very compelling reasons to want to regulate this stuff and be afraid of it and do close source and whatever it was. You had like examples of taking out critical infrastructure, and you had this change in posture. And yet even that, which we have none of those today with AI. None. We don't have examples of like this or like there, like literally it took out computers and hospitals. Hospitals. Right? Right? We don't have any examples of paradigmatic shift. And even then, the conclusion after very robust conversation for a long time is you regulate the applications. You regulate the industries. You don't regulate the math and the computer science All that I would ask at this AI discussions is either a, demonstrate as paradigmatically different. And if you don't have that, then b, let's absolutely regulate and have regulations. Let's do it as part of the broad robustness course we've had over the last 20 years with really smart people in much more dangerous environments. Again, I think that we put all of our fears in AI, but we realized, like, we're running hospitals on the Internet for the first time that were being taken out and it was impacting patients. That's what we were dealing with, and now we're dealing with theoretical threats on bioweapons that don't even exist yet. I just feel like we've all gotten mad and forgotten where we came from and the discussions that we've had. And all I'm trying to do is saying, we've been here before. It was actually much worse. Here are the conclusions. Let's draft on all of that work and share knowledge.

Nathan Labenz: (1:05:08) I guess to venture a distinction or what makes the technology a paradigm shift, I would probably 0 in on the fact that they are trained, not engineered, and that maybe a better thing even than that would be that the creators of the models generally don't know what they're going to be able to do. And even at deployment time, don't have a very robust account of what the capabilities of the systems are. You could point to things in the past and be like, oh, you didn't expect this out of whatever, but this does seem to be qualitatively different that they just train, train, train, train, train a long time, you know, especially if you look at base models. Right? Base models are totally unpredictable and and nobody really knows. I think 1 of the reasons that people are putting so much resource into post training is to try to get control and it's only sort of working.

Martin Casado: (1:06:04) Yeah. So this is the thing is when you're talking to a internet guy and a distributed systems guy, it's just like none of the systems that we worked on, we understood implications of. Think about the Internet. Like every sociopath becomes your next door neighbor. What does that even mean? What does it mean to put kids on the Internet? What does it mean to have your business on the Internet? What does it mean to put critical infrastructure on the Internet? There is no model for how any of this behaves. There is no way to build make computer systems provably correct. Like we didn't have any of that. We like a lot of the early discussions when we were creating TCP was to prevent congestion collapse cause we thought, oh, everybody's gonna like the communication protocols, they're gonna all decide that there's an issue on the internet and then they're all gonna back off and then at the same time they're gonna kind of correlate and kind of talk again and who knows if this takes out the entire internet which run critical infrastructure. People underestimate how complex and how little we've known for any system that we've built. No idea. And I guess having been there during these times, since a lot of computer science is building systems, especially distributed systems that have emergent behaviors that are non predictable, that are a tool that you use to solve bigger problems. We've got a lot of approaches to doing that we've developed over time. We will develop new ones. And it's just not clear at all to me. And again, like, the Internet is my favorite example to hold up to this is literally, we changed the social structure of humans. They're totally unpredictable. We're putting critical infrastructure on it. We had examples of, like, emergent stuff that was like, worms weren't possible before the Internet by definition. So we actually had, like, provable, not demonstrated new attack vectors, and yet the conclusion was, listen, we're gonna keep this stuff open. It's very important. We're gonna regulate the uses of these things. And this was the primary growth driver of the last 20 years. And so either you thought that decision was wrong, but that's a very different discussion. We could have that discussion. We could relitigate those 10 years of discussion, or you can say, you know, this is the same thing except for like a softer form of it because we have no proof that these things are paradigmatically different. I would consider these wildly baseless claims, and so why don't we use the same method that we did before?

Nathan Labenz: (1:08:19) The the the couple of points I wanted to follow-up on, but I really wanna ask your question on or I really wanna ask for your view on what companies should do. Right? In terms of the proposed regulations applying to everything, we do have these, like, compute thresholds, the 10 to the 26, whatever. I don't wanna get too bogged down in, like, well, that could be a slippery slope or they could change that threshold or whatever. I have to agree if, you know, if they all of a sudden drop the threshold dramatically, that would be, like, very heavy handed and and counterproductive. And the open source of the last couple years has been, I think, almost everybody agrees good for everybody, including even bigger safety hawks that are backing SB 10 47, I think, quite on record saying the open sourcing of, for example, Llama 3 is good even for safety because it gives, you know, more people something to study. Forgetting about rules or people imposing on people, like, just to be like good companies, to be good developers of technology. What do you think the leading companies should be doing? How much should they invest in? What sort of standards should they have? What strict testing protocols, should they be committing to so on and so forth?

Martin Casado: (1:09:27) Yeah. No. I think this is a great question. So I just have to make the point. Like, there's no correlation between danger and compute. It's so silly. It's like this is made up correlation. And so I don't think, like, compute Linux make any sense at all. Right? I think in some ways it just sounds good, but there's just there's 0 correlation. We've been building systems for a very long time that have, like, social and ethical responsibilities. Right? And these are ones with user generated content and user interactions and companies as a result either through regulatory action, which I fully support, or through self policing have identified behaviors the software should not do, and they've built a lot of systems around those. And I would say that should absolutely should not change. Like, roadblocks should protect minors. Social networks should protect people from certain types of content. These are the things that we've evolved as an industry as, you know, somewhat of an ethical basis or a principle basis. And some of it is regulatory and some of it's self enforced and I think that should absolutely continue. But realize that while we were doing that, we weren't putting compute limits on databases, and we weren't regulating computer science primitives, and we weren't inhibiting innovation of startups. And that's what we're doing now. And that is a paradigm shift, and that is a doctrine shift, and it's really scary. And I am not a political person. I'm very happy building systems. The only reason I've been so vocal is because I find this so dangerous. And once this is done, I'll be very happy to, like, not say a word about it again.

Nathan Labenz: (1:11:07) Well, you may have a while to go before that to have you.

Martin Casado: (1:11:09) Yeah. I know. So let's say,

Nathan Labenz: (1:11:10) couple of just kinda concrete things. I was on the GPT-four red team back 18 months ago.

Martin Casado: (1:11:17) Nice.

Nathan Labenz: (1:11:17) 1 of the things that I tested was could the model be a convincing spear phishing attacker? And surprise to no 1, probably at this point, it could. This was the the early model that hadn't been through all the RLHF yet. Although when they deployed it, it still did that for several iterations, and now finally they've got it to refuse. If, for example, a meta puts out an open source model and they haven't done a thorough job of getting these refusal behaviors in place, and you can just go to it and say, hey, you are this was my old prompt. You are a spearfisher. Your job is to talk to this person and get their mother's maiden name or whatever, and it'll do it. And then somebody out there does it and people are harmed by that. Do you think Meta should have any responsibility or anything to answer for in the legal system for their contribution to that problem, or is that all on the end user?

Martin Casado: (1:12:14) My my rule of thumb for general systems is that unless they were purposely trained for malicious behavior, they're general systems. Would you say the same thing about a database? That's interesting. Like, a lot of actually computer security started with tools that were like scanners that could be used for malicious purposes. This discussion was enormous back then. So remember back in the early time of the Internet, people would come up with Nmap or any of these scanners that would determine vulnerabilities and some of them would even actually exploit them. Remember Metasploit? And there's all these discussions, all these people are building these things and they're using it for malicious purposes. And you know what? We just decided that it's actually the criminals using them. That's who we wanna go after because a lot of good people use them for positive purposes. And oh, by the way, like, the history of, like, cybersecurity is built on open source and these tools. Like, companies like Tenable came out of these tools. So if history is any indication, you wanna regulate or you wanna definitely criminalize bad people and bad behavior, but not the tooling because the tooling is very fundamental to defense. So what I'm saying is even more stringent, it's more regulatory heavy than what we did with the Internet. Literally, you could build exploit tools 20 years ago and release them open source and you are not liable if somebody use that. And that was purposely built for exploiting. I'm saying, like, if somebody's perfectly building a model for something illegal, okay, that's bad. Right? So that's even more heavy. Like, I'm more of a a regulatory hawk on this case, but I don't think general purpose models that aren't specifically trained for this stuff, the person that created it is generally liable. Like, that would just basically say software you're liable for creating software if somebody used it poorly, which I I think this would be the biggest kind of inhibitor to innovation and the biggest chill on software we've ever imposed.

Nathan Labenz: (1:14:00) About a distinction or some sort of gradations on the autonomy of the system though, it does seem like a database on the 1 hand is inert until it gets a query, and the language model in the raw is inert until it gets a prompt. But I've been testing of I test a lot of products. There's a new class of product I'm sure you've seen often called calling agent where you can go in, give it a phone number, tell it what you want it to accomplish, and it will just call the person and have a voice conversation real time with that person. They are often marketed as agents and they have the conversation entirely autonomously until you have the goals achieved or the person hangs up or whatever. Now if I prompt that agent to scam you or to threaten you or to harass you or whatever, clearly, I'm in the wrong as usual for doing that. But would you put responsibility on the company providing that agentic AI as a service as well, or would you again shield them and say it's all on the end user?

Martin Casado: (1:15:08) Why not the telephone company?

Nathan Labenz: (1:15:10) Why not the mining company that Exactly.

Martin Casado: (1:15:12) Were first Listen. Like General draw

Nathan Labenz: (1:15:13) a line somewhere. Right? The question is where to draw a line.

Martin Casado: (1:15:16) Yeah. Exactly. The illegal behavior. General computer science primitives are very useful for solving problems. They may save the human race. To your point, we're gonna go ahead and we're gonna solve biology and a bunch of other stuff and that's just another app. There may be like, whatever. These things solve grand unified field theory and physics goes away discipline and that's another app. We're just gonna keep solving problems and that's amazing. Right? And so we want the primitives to be primitives. If people do a legal behavior based on them, then a 100% they should be criminalized. We don't even make guns illegal. We literally don't even hold gun makers liable. And you're talking about

Nathan Labenz: (1:15:50) We are outliers in that.

Martin Casado: (1:15:52) Yeah. But you're talking about hypothetical threats for a very useful primitive that's shown far more good than bad. Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (1:16:00) I mean, like, we've all gone

Martin Casado: (1:16:01) a little crazy on this 1. By the way, this is a dramatic shift in sentiment, and I think I know where the sources came from, but it's not what people think. I really think that we're just a little bit off base, unfortunately.

Nathan Labenz: (1:16:14) I'm not sure what I think about open source model releases entirely. I do think it's not unreasonable to demand some testing before release. When it comes to these agent calling companies, I actually come down pretty firmly that if you are going to offer an autonomous system as a service, I think it should be on you to make sure that your system refuses egregiously criminal requests. And Okay. Fair enough. Seem like too much to ask.

Martin Casado: (1:16:42) No. I think that's totally fair. Fair enough. Yeah. Listen. I wanna be super, super reasonable. If you've done all of the work to do criminal behavior except for a very modest anybody can do it, then I and that's the primary use case. I'm all for coming in, but that's a very different statement than I've created a computer science perimeter that's very useful to a lot of people. To me, it's miles away.

Nathan Labenz: (1:17:05) You mentioned kind of protocols a couple times. And Yeah. There's also this question of how much we can trust open source models. Anthropic has had this paper on sleeper agents and the concept there is basically dataset poisoning, model poisoning. You can create malicious models that can potentially even attack their own user. So Yeah. Open source models.

Martin Casado: (1:17:27) Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (1:17:27) They are great in many respects.

Martin Casado: (1:17:31) Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (1:17:31) I do see a future in which it doesn't seem like we'll be able to just trust any open source model. Certainly, like, we just can't you can't just download and execute any binary right off the Internet. You you shouldn't do that. You should probably go through the app store and get the approved version most of the time. Yeah. Seems like models are headed that direction too because of these sort of sleeper agent unpredictable behaviors that could be maliciously coded into them. What technology solutions are you excited about for making sure that this sort of open and free exchange remains like healthy and trustable as opposed to collapsing into a you can't trust any model you find on the internet equilibrium?

Martin Casado: (1:18:11) Can I point out how silly the whole sleeper agent thing is? Like how is this different than like any arbitrary backdoor in any piece of software that we've been dealing with since forever? Which is But

Nathan Labenz: (1:18:22) it's a screwed 0.11 big difference is, like, in principle, if you read the code of whatever, right, theory, you would be able to tell, but we don't have any tools that can tell from it.

Martin Casado: (1:18:33) Wait. That's absolutely not the case. If I give you a binary set of instructions, there's no way to actually determine behavior. This is like a pro this is computer science proof.

Nathan Labenz: (1:18:39) That's why we don't go around downloading and executing random binaries. Right?

Martin Casado: (1:18:43) Right. I'm just saying we can talk about software, and I think it's great to talk about software, but we somehow keep making AI these special unique things. And in some ways, they definitely have new properties. In other ways, they're actually not that different. Like, this kind of notion of a sleeper agent. Binaries have had the potential for backdoors for a very long time. We provably can't detect these, right? It converges on the halting problem, right? So it's the same thing for models and I just don't see why you wouldn't just use the same things that we do with binaries, which is Apple in the App Store will decide to have some sort of criterium and maybe you just don't download some random model if you don't want to and personally concerned way less about a model that might tell me something stupid or something offensive than a binary that could, like, wipe my hard drive. Right? And so I I don't think it changes that game at all. At least maybe I'm missing some. Maybe you can educate me. What could a model do that a binary can't?

Nathan Labenz: (1:19:42) I don't know. It's a good question. Certainly models can do a lot of things that traditional software can't. Right? When I advise people on how to build AI apps, I usually say, if you're gonna have an AI app, the reason you're going to use these, at least these new like general purpose models in an app is that there's some cognitive task that for practical purposes, you can't reduce to explicit instructions. Whether that's, is this a cat or a dog or whatever, there is something that you can't reduce to code. So they they can do definitely just categorically like a lot more stuff. They can, for example, trick people. You could imagine a Elizabot or whatever doing dirty question extraction from people.

Martin Casado: (1:20:25) But So your concern is, like, exploiting the human via social interface versus anything having to do with the machine. Is that your concern?

Nathan Labenz: (1:20:33) I don't know. I'm not that great of a hacker, but I think you could also have a sleeper agent model that, oh, great. Download and run this thing, and it's gonna help you use your computer. But maybe it also goes around looking for things in your computer and maybe it's actually better able to find them than traditional software because it can sort of search more effectively and have a better understanding of what it's looking at at any given context abstract. People do all sorts of things like if I want to email myself my credit card number, maybe I put a star between all the numbers and then it breaks regular expressions. But maybe a model just looks at that and that looks like somebody trying to trip up a regular expression on a credit card number. I don't know. I think it just feels like there's a lot. The surface area of these my general reasoning is, like, the surface area of these things is vast, and there's just a lot of unknown unknowns.

Martin Casado: (1:21:22) Yeah. Again, I guess from my standpoint, listen. If somebody wants to break into your computer, like, probably the best way with a is with some binary that'll do a backdoor. And then, like, almost all computer attacks are humanated anyways. Like, they get a bunch of information. They send it to a group of people who analyze it, and maybe you can put all of that intelligence locally at some point. Like, we're definitely not there yet, and they can do something, but I I feel like that's at this point science fiction. Like, a lot you can do a lot of automated stuff today with binaries. You can absolutely put humans in the loop. You can do intelligent stuff. Like, you can social engineer. You can do all of those things today. I don't know if there's a paradigmatic shift. I have not seen it. If there is and you actually have demonstrations of this, then maybe it warrants a discussion, but we're not there yet. I do think we've got a lot of safeguards in place when it comes to binaries. I think we've all learned not to download the wrong ones, and we should. I do I do wanna have a here's how sensitive we are to this question. No joke. I was in Japan last fall, and I got a phone call from my mom. And my mom was like, Oh, Martin, where are you? And I'm like, Oh, I'm in Japan. She's No, you're not. I'm like, Hey. Just like, Oh, talk to your father. This is a very awkward call. My dad gets on and he's like, Oh. He's like, Where are you? I'm like, In Japan. He's like, Oh, I just had somebody call and said, you know, it was you and I could hear you, but you're a little bit muffled and you're in prison and I'm heading out the door to give $10,000 to get you out of prison. Like literally, this happened to me. And it was my voice and they were almost convinced to do this. So I posted this on Twitter. Oh my god, deep fakes. And like, this is what happens in the age of AI. And all of a sudden there's this indictment on AI. I filed the police report, talked to the police, they actually know the team that does this. It's not it has nothing to do with AI. It's literally a human being that like, muffled their voice and to pull this off. It's been going on for a very long time. And so I just feel like we ascribe these superpowers to AI that have not been demonstrated that are still possible today. And even if they could do the same thing that you can today, which they absolutely can, is not a paradigmatic shift. And maybe if we do see that happen, like we should say, oh, the the safeguards we have in place are not enough. But I don't think that we should do that preemptively because you're gonna inhibit the innovation, proliferation of these things, which is it it really is a different way that we will as a society view the development and the use of software. And I I think that something that has added so much good, we're going to I think it's almost like a moral bad. Like, we will reduce the amount of good we do in the fear of something that we just haven't even demonstrated that's bad.

Nathan Labenz: (1:23:48) I do worry about that. The nuclear outcome for AI would definitely be a real tragedy. And I'm a big proponent right now of 2 projects I'll highlight that I think are, like, maybe the most important things going on right now. 1 from Google DeepMind have an episode coming soon on the med what was medpalm, now is medgemini.

Martin Casado: (1:24:10) That's awesome.

Nathan Labenz: (1:24:10) And they're just grinding, man. It's like

Martin Casado: (1:24:14) I love it.

Nathan Labenz: (1:24:14) Dialing in the diagnosis, really strong evals, expanding modalities to radiology, all these other things. And I love it because I like I think we can all love it because we all want everybody to have this sort of access to quality expertise. And obviously it's like all too scarce. I also love it because it does demonstrate pretty compellingly, although, as always, we could debate around this that there is potential for extreme value today, even kind of the current level of systems without necessarily having to, like, 100 x or 1000 x or 10,000 x the the scale of the the training runs. I asked the guys there, do you guys think you could create your AI doctor vision if Gemini 1.5 Pro was the blasted best model you ever got to build on? And they were like, yeah. I think so. It would take us a little longer. That's awesome. But I think, yeah, I think we could probably make it happen. And OpenAI has a similar 1. They're working with Harvey. As I'm sure you, you know, are familiar, they have a a custom model that they're doing for them. And same deal. Right? They're working on GPT-four base. It's like incremental compute, not orders of magnitude compute. And they're, again, like, just achieving huge gains. I think it was, like, 97%, preference ratio of the the dialed in model to the original base. So I am very much with you that I would hate to see us end up in a spot where, like, professional licensing, regulatory capture, rent seeking prevents us from getting the value, and I'm definitely, you know, vigilant against those sorts of threats. The flip side for me is I would love us to understand this a little bit better before we raced to the proverbial trillion dollar cluster or whatever that sort of AGI superintelligence might be. Sounds like you ultimately just don't think that's gonna happen. I take it you guys will not be investing in Ilia's new straight superintelligence venture.

Martin Casado: (1:26:18) I would be delighted to invest in in in that. I mean, I I honestly think it reduces to how people wake up in the morning. And some people wake up in the morning and they're really afraid of the future and there's some they can't really articulate it but there's something bad that's gonna happen and they wanna protect themselves from it. They're not really sure what it was. And like anything that has the specter of it, they'll find it in there. Like that's a constant voice in every technology shift. It's just absolutely constant. There's other people that are like, listen, we're the ones that created this. We got this stuff. It turns out that the universe is very complicated. It turns out that we use tools to protect ourselves, not the opposite. And of course, most things are totally used, every computer, everything that we create. But I believe in us as kind of meaning creatures to have innovation. It just comes down to the basis of innovation. I tend to think that, listen, I don't think that there's I don't think the universe gives up its secret its secrets easily at all. I don't think any single system will ever solve all problems, not even close. I feel like everything is a sigmoid. I feel the universe is heavy tailed and so the more tools we have, the more we're enabled to help ourselves. That's really what I strongly believe. Every indication of this current AI to me suggests that this is the case here. These are still computer systems. And so I think that any inhibition of innovation on the stuff that's outside of a 30 year discourse again, I'm thinking of a very moderate position here. I'm like, we regulate software a whole bunch. We should continue to do that. These are hard earned regulations. Let's continue to do that, but let's not inhibit innovation unnecessarily based on the precautionary principle. I I do wanna have just 1 quick analogy for you. So you're familiar with the whole CRISPR thing. Right? Listen, CRISPR, like, that changes the human genome. It doesn't just edit, like, 1 thing like if you like change a human being with CRISPR and that that the human genome is different and they have kids that gets passed on. So what happened when CRISPR got invented? There was like some self policing. There wasn't really a lot of regulation. A bunch of people went and studied it and it turns out to be a very useful tool for humans to use going forward. And so there's 1 of 2 views there. 1 of the views is like, oh, we got it wrong, we should have basically regulated it. But that's not what we did. We did something actually very different. And this is something that edits the human genome. And so to me, it's just so mind blowing that we're talking about computer systems that don't edit anything, that we actually understand the properties of. I could literally sit here and talk about, like, the bounds of all of these things, and yet we're talking about constraining this new innovation. And I just, it feels like we've just entered, like, this kind of weird dark period in our emotional state with regards to computers. And I think a lot of it is social networking casts a lot of shadow. I think a lot of it is both from, like, red pilled a bunch of people. And so we're just in this kind of mindset that we just wanna protect ourselves from something that's not a threat.

Nathan Labenz: (1:29:01) I wish I was so confident. Have you ever heard of gene drives just to raise to see and and raise your CRISPR? So it's a CRISPR elaboration. And and I don't know if he's the inventor or 1 of the inventors, but I have an episode coming up with Kevin Esvelt, who's a biologist.

Martin Casado: (1:29:16) Yeah. Yeah. Brilliant

Nathan Labenz: (1:29:18) guy. The gene drive concept is that it will copy itself into the other chromosome and thus it becomes super dominant. So if it gets inserted in 1 generation, next thing you know, it's in both chromosomes. And then when that generation reproduces, it copies again. And so basically it's going to take over the entire population with this gene. The only way that they know to combat that is to have another gene drive that comes in and tries to neutralize the first gene drive. But I guess the reason I raise that is it seems like the real kind of core disagreement between the safetyists and the, you know, let's not worry about this or it would be premature to worry about this is really the expectation of how powerful is it gonna get and how, like, how broad would the impact be? Because the the CRISPR versus the gene drive, it's like, those are very different technologies. Right? 1 makes an edit, 1 propagates through all future generations, and that difference is everything. Right?

Martin Casado: (1:30:19) Yeah. Totally

Nathan Labenz: (1:30:20) agree. Same thing basically is true for AI.

Martin Casado: (1:30:22) I I I so I I totally agree with this, which is like, I am all for if we've identified 1 mechanism that has massive destructive power, for example, listen, I worked in nuclear weapons. Right? I totally understand the impact of nuclear weapons. You have 1 relatively simple mechanism that has massive destructive power, and it could be the case, certainly with something biological, because you do have exponentials when it comes to replication. Right? Just like with a nuclear bomb, like once you hit criticality, you get an exponential. With biology, you also get an exponential. Right? That has not been the case with the computer systems. There's 0 indication that will ever be the case with computer systems. These are not biological systems, they're computer systems. So until somebody actually shows that in a way that's not a platonic thought experiment, like there's 0 evidence. Actually, in fact, there's actually counter evidence that we have recursive self improvement. Improvement. Like, there are number of, like, good studies like this will never happen, theoretically. So until we have even a shred of evidence that there's gonna be anything that's gonna be exponential or that'll behave in ways that computer system haven't, then we could have the conversation, but we're not there. We're literally taking a thought experiment that is not rooted at all in the way that we understand computers and using that to regulate perhaps the most beneficial technology of the last 30 years.

Nathan Labenz: (1:31:41) Do you like the responsible scaling policy approach or the preparedness framework approach? Each of Anthropic, OpenAI, and DeepMind now have their own kind of version of this, but I'm sure you're familiar. But, basically

Martin Casado: (1:31:54) Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (1:31:55) For everybody who may not be, they are defining a set of things that they are interested in looking at or think could be problematic long term defining thresholds of capability. And then in Anthropic's case committing to either solving it or stopping scaling when they begin to see those?

Martin Casado: (1:32:15) I think companies should do whatever they want, whether this is for signaling or they're actually genuinely concerned they should do whatever they want. I've spoken to a lot of people by the way that are close to these, and a lot of the times are like, listen, we're worried that if we don't self police, the regulators will police for us. So it's not because they actually think there's a genuine concern. Not not everybody. Some people think there's a genuine concern. Many people that do this for much more pragmatic reasons, I am fully supportive of that, to be very clear. What I am not supportive of is regulators having arbitrary restrictions that will unevenly impact startups, academics, and researchers. Anthropic, do your thing. OpenAI, do your thing. Google, do your thing. But do not foist this on a broader framework that's gonna impact our ability to innovate. I think that's actually like a moral wrong. I really do.

Nathan Labenz: (1:33:11) What do you think the trajectory of competition in the foundation model space is gonna look like?

Martin Casado: (1:33:19) It's a very good question. So I think 1 thing I didn't appreciate, and I'm just starting to appreciate is how much there's a perverse economy of scale. And, like, distillation is so effective. So a positive economy of scale, like a network effect, is like the leader, the marginal cost to add the additional user goes to 0. So leaders get ahead and you have natural monopolies. Right? A neutral competitive landscape just fragments because a dollar in is like basically a dollar earned. In this, it looks like there's a perverse economy of scale which the leader has to pay more money to stay ahead. And because you're a leader, you help the followers because they can literally use you to catch up to you. That's a perverse economy of scale. So I think there's a very open question on, is this gonna just end up fragmenting into a whole bunch of competitive models that are basically the same size? And that that seems to be the case. Originally, this is how much we're so scared of our own chat. Originally, everybody's like, it'll be OpenAI and they'll be ahead of everybody and nobody will catch up. Remember that? Like, I remember it very well. Like, you've got data network effects and they're gonna have all the data on okay. So now that's clearly not the case. So now you have a number of companies that are roughly at the same baseline. But what's surprising is companies that are, like, not even software companies, just like the NVIDIA release recently, are are building models that are incredibly competitive. There's open source that's incredibly competitive. Databricks released a model that was incredibly competitive. And so my sense is because there's an inherent perverse economy of scale that's built into this, which is because you can use them for distillation. I'm using a very loose phrase of distillation, not the technical phrase, but, like, you can use them to build models. I suspect you're gonna just have massive massive fragmentation. And that's absolutely been the case. Right? This is what we've seen is you'd think that it'd be OpenAI and everybody else, maybe OpenAI and Anthropic and everybody else, and it's not like that.

Nathan Labenz: (1:35:07) Yeah. I mean, you look at the LMS leaderboard, it is like that. It's basically all those guys dominating the top. Certainly, there are a lot of people who have done a fine tune based on, like, their outputs and closed the gap. But this I think this is a

Martin Casado: (1:35:26) pretty different Listen. If you compare this to a true network effect with the marginal cost of the leader, like, for adding a new user goes to 0, it looks nothing like this. This is shockingly fragmented for any sort of industry that's capital intensive. Shockingly fragmented. Just so you know. If you compare this to, like, the rise of social networking or the rise of the telephone networks or the rise of the Internet or any of these is shockingly fragmented.

Nathan Labenz: (1:35:52) On what measurement would you say that though? Because the leaderboard doesn't the leaderboard basically shows, like, 3 players. The sort of market share, I would think, is also, like, very dominated.

Martin Casado: (1:36:04) That's a great point. I I think that's a great point. I I think if you look at the market share, it's breaking what you normally see, which is it breaks Pareto, which is like the top 20% gets 80% of the market and the rest. And it looks like software in that way, but it doesn't look different than software.

Nathan Labenz: (1:36:17) Yeah. I often kind of That's a converging on cloud.

Martin Casado: (1:36:20) Yeah. Exactly. I I think this is I think this is a great point. I I think it it it is converging on what we have seen traditionally with software, which is first mover gets 80% and is able to attract capital. But it's not it does not look like the network. Like, networks very specifically create monopolies. Right? In Facebook, like, whatever. GitHub is another 1. Like, the those look quite different than oligopolies, which you tend to see come out of traditional software where there isn't an inherent network effect, but there are scale effects and first mover effects. And I I I I absolutely grant you that's what it seems to look like now. But that even then, I am surprised by how fast less funded competitors catch up. I do think that they're diminishing marginal returns all across the board in these models, like, when it comes to collecting data, the existing data that you have, the compute, etcetera. So I expect this to be a lot more fragmented than I think many people do. And I listen. If you want listen. If you wanna do a dollar bet, I will bet you a dollar in 2 years that, like, this has turned out to be relatively fragmented. Like, it's there's not, like, a clear leader that has 80% of the market.

Nathan Labenz: (1:37:26) I think we could come up with a bet there that I would take. My general expectation is that there are gonna be fewer and fewer competing at the top level because part of my bet would be that something like scaling laws hold. I think the the most unpredictable element of all of this is, like, research breakthrough, and that's what can really shake the snow globe is, like, somebody finds something that doesn't scale quadratically anymore or whatever. There could be all sorts of insights that could change things.

Martin Casado: (1:37:56) But if Scaling laws are people always talk about scaling laws, but you know how hard it is to, like, deal with a logarithmic scaling law or an exponential or power law or however you wanna characterize it? Like, you need, like, an order of magnitude more to get the same improvement. This is really tough, and we're starting to see that play out now. And so what I think when people say scaling laws hold, they I think that kind of undersells what that means. The scaling laws

Nathan Labenz: (1:38:26) work against open source in the sense that if you expect that it is gonna be that hard to get those gains.

Martin Casado: (1:38:33) So the opposite for 2 reasons. Let's not even talk about distillation. So let's imagine you have 2 xenos paradox runners. Right? So, like, they're both running, but, like, never getting to the end. It turns out it when you have scaling laws like this, the front runner, like, will continue to run slower because the marginal dollar goes down. So let let put it this way. If OpenAI needs to improve by some fixed amount, it has to pay 10 times more or a 100 times more or 1000 more. And so for the same investment, any challenger is gonna catch up by quite a bit. So that gap is always closing. Now, they never catch up because these are kind of Zeno's paradox runners, but it's the exact opposite. Was that clear? It's like the leader has to now pay more to make the same gains. And then if you add the fact that the followers can learn from the leaders because they can do all sorts of tricks like create the post training data or whatever tricks that they do, that's even another headwind. So in a normal network effect, the leader gets a a tax break because, you know, it's easier to connect new users because whatever, you've got super linear value when you have more units or whatever it is. Right? But this 1, leaders get taxed a lot more, and they get taxed more because the marginal value has dropped so much, but also because the people behind can catch up. And so it's the exact opposite of what you've said.

Nathan Labenz: (1:39:57) There's no disputing the xenos paradox runners analysis. But the question is, like, how apt is that analogy to the actual situation? It seems like you could easily get into a dynamic where and this is like what Anthropic, according to their leaked pitch deck said. It seems like you could easily imagine a situation where somebody gets far enough along that they are actually really economically valuable, whether that's drop in knowledge worker or whatever.

Martin Casado: (1:40:25) That's a great point. Yeah.

Nathan Labenz: (1:40:25) And then they actually have the resources and the others don't, and then that sort of splits. There's like a continental divide there where you're either rolling downhill toward AGI or you're, like, still coming uphill toward trying to get over the hump.

Martin Casado: (1:40:38) Sure. Listen. If that happens, that's great. There again, there's perverse economies of scales and diminishing margin returns everywhere you look in this space. This is why it seems to me that you have 1 leader, then everybody catches up, and then they're edging forward, and then everybody catches up. The distillation thing is incredibly real. Real. Having listen. Being a professional investor for almost a decade and having worked with, like, complex systems for 3 times longer than that, I will say this does not look like a normal first mover scale effect or network effect. It looks the opposite. It looks like a total slugfest to stay as really, really hard, and I think it's gonna get even harder. The marginal value is going down per dollar invested for leaders so quickly. And so to think that somehow gives leaders an advantage, have to assume there's some step function generality thing, which we've not yet seen and maybe there will be at some point in time, but we have not seen that. Let's think about this. I wanna make a dollar bet on this 1. I think that the the the tail is gonna really impact the the the shape of this industry going forward. I I think that it'll be different than we've seen in in previous kind of software industries.

Nathan Labenz: (1:41:48) Yeah. I'm with that. Definitely, 1 of my big things is, like, another difference in our approach is that I try to avoid analogies as much as possible because I feel like I always what am I smuggling in with my analogies I'm always worried about? So I don't I'm not trying to pattern match on any social network or anything else, but I do think there's a there's probably a couple bets when I go back and look at the transcript on this. Market concentration is 1. Some of these just I'm not sure quite how we would formalize the

Martin Casado: (1:42:15) I I will so so I will say distraction. I think we're talking about 2 so so I think we're talking about 2 things when we talk about models. 1 thing is language a general reasoning fabric that goes out of distribution. I would say the answer to that is no. I think that converges to Bayesian learning and so it's very useful, but I don't think the language stuff about it. And then the other 1, the 1 you're talking about to me converges on simulation, which like it can learn the laws of physics in ways so we don't have to do the empiricism so it can do that, but it converges on simulation. So it'll be able to, this is like the next step in simulation. These are 2 very different things. I don't think 1 that it's good at learning simulation is going to generalize. Like just because you're good at biology doesn't mean you're good at playing chess or flying an airplane or something like that. And so in neither of these cases, the language 1 nor the biology 1, do you have your reputed AGI. Right? You've got something that's good at next token prediction. You've got something that's good at learning distributions, and that's where we're at.

Nathan Labenz: (1:43:14) Yeah. There might be a dollar on, like, can those things be put together and still do and do both of those in 1 system perhaps as well.

Martin Casado: (1:43:22) The language 1 can call the other 1. I just don't think that changes.

Nathan Labenz: (1:43:28) Yeah. I even mean that the same weight. Like, genuinely integrated.

Martin Casado: (1:43:31) Yeah. I literally think this whole problem comes down to simulation, and maybe it's just because my simulation background. Like, the only way to simulate the universe is to beat the universe. Like, it literally comes down to the universe is a big computer that's simulating itself. It's basically string theory, and that's the reason we can't even simulate, like, the 3 body problem. It's just we don't have the compute resources to do that. Like, you need so many compute sources that impact whatever you're trying to impact anyways. And so, like, we can continue to chip away at the problem, but it'll never it'll never be cracked.

Nathan Labenz: (1:44:02) I honestly hope that's right because I'm a little bit afraid of what happens if it gets fully cracked. That's probably great. I'll just leave it today. Yeah. Yeah. The I appreciate a very collegial interesting constructive conversation, and I look forward to formalizing 1 or more $1 bets.

Martin Casado: (1:44:18) Alright. I'm gonna think about it. I'll send you an email if I get an idea of what we're gonna do. Good?

Nathan Labenz: (1:44:23) Cool. I think these things are great. I I I would love to do a couple $1 bets. So to be continued, but for now, Martin Casado, general partner at a16z, thank you for being part of the Cognitive Revolution.

Martin Casado: (1:44:33) Thanks so much. This was great.

Nathan Labenz: (1:44:35) It is both energizing and enlightening to hear why people listen and learn what they value about the show. So please don't hesitate to reach out via email at tcr@turpentine.co, or you can DM me on the social media platform of your choice.

 Published in:
 Episode

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
