# Computational Life: How Self-Replicators Arise from Randomness, with Google’s Researchers
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/computational-life-how-self-replicators-arise-from-randomness-with-googles-researchers/
# Date: 2024-08-30
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

Nathan Labenz: (0:00)

Hello and welcome to the Cognitive Revolution, where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs, and builders working on the frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week, we'll explore their revolutionary ideas, and together we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work, life, and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz, joined by my co-host Erik Torenberg.

Hello and welcome back to the Cognitive Revolution. Today, my guests are Ettore Randazzo and Luca Versari from Google's Paradigms of Intelligence team. Ettore and Luca are co-authors on a fascinating recent paper called "How Well-Formed Self-Replicating Programs Emerge from Simple Interaction." This paper explores how self-replicating programs can spontaneously emerge in an extremely simple computational environment. And while the paper itself is focused on a narrow set of technical experiments, I found it to be deeply thought-provoking about the nature of life and the potential future of artificial intelligence.

By demonstrating how complex life-like behaviors can arise from very simple setups and basic rules, it helps develop our intuitions for the origins of life on Earth and the possibility of artificial life emerging in our increasingly complex digital ecosystems. In this conversation, we go deep into the esoteric details of their experimental setup, which uses a minimalist programming language to process random interactions between random short strings of code, and yet surprisingly quickly gives rise to complex phenomena, including multiple classes of self-replicators, competition, evolution, and even extinction—all without any selection mechanism or optimization function whatsoever. It really is profound to behold just how much complexity emerges from randomness in such a tiny digital toy universe.

Toward the end, we zoom out to consider the implications of this work for AI development and safety. While Ettore and Luca are cautious about drawing too many conclusions, I can't help but understand this work as yet another reason to expect the unexpected. If such simple digital life can form from pure randomness, I have to expect that the optimization power of the economy as a whole will give rise to meaningful forms of self-replicating AI systems. And yet, even with determined effort, I find it extremely hard to imagine what those new forms might be like.

This episode exemplifies why I love making this show. We start with a seemingly niche technical paper and end up grappling with some of the biggest questions facing humanity and all the other life forms with which we share planet Earth as we collectively hurtle toward an AI-altered future. As always, I appreciate it when listeners share the show online. Feel free to tag me, and of course, we welcome your feedback via our website, cognitiverevolution.ai, or you can DM me anywhere you like. Now, I hope you enjoy this horizon-expanding conversation with Ettore Randazzo and Luca Versari from Google's Paradigms of Intelligence team on the emergence of computational life.

Ettore Randazzo and Luca Versari from Google's Paradigms of Intelligence team, welcome to the Cognitive Revolution.

Ettore Randazzo: (3:12)

Glad to be here.

Luca Versari: (3:14)

Nice to be here.

Nathan Labenz: (3:14)

Yeah, I'm really excited about this conversation. It's prompted by a recent paper that you guys put out that I have found really super interesting and quite thought-provoking. It's called "Computational Life: How Well-Formed Self-Replicating Programs Emerge from Simple Interaction." That's a pretty good summary of everything that we're going to be unpacking over the next hour or so.

I'd love to start with some real basic stuff, and we'll get into a lot more detail. I'm coming to this from a very AI-obsessed perspective. I assume you guys think a lot about how your work connects to the future of potentially many AIs and potentially AIs becoming a new sort of life form as well. I'm always trying to figure out: where is this going in the big picture? Is it crazy to think that AIs could at some point properly be viewed as a new life form, or is that in fact realistic, and what criteria would it need to satisfy?

So I thought this paper was really enlightening and, again, thought-provoking in a number of different ways. But one kind of simple early argument that you make in the paper is that the capacity for self-replication is really fundamental to the notion of life. So I'd love to just give you a chance, first of all, to start with that high-level observation and unpack that argument for us.

Ettore Randazzo: (4:40)

Okay. So from my point of view, of course, getting into the business of defining what life is is pretty complicated. But the one thing that I think people can agree on is that life is something that has some inherent order, let's say. It's not like a random collection of molecules or whatever—that's probably not life. So from that point of view, one can think of things like the second law of thermodynamics, which would say that it's hard to have order effectively. And in that way, basically, a self-replicating system is one of the simplest systems in which you have this force that acts against the second law of thermodynamics, because copying oneself introduces some structure, some shape, some coherence into what otherwise would be completely disordered. So that's why I personally think that self-replication is one of the first steps toward life.

Luca Versari: (5:41)

So in the field of origin of life, and also biology and artificial life, I think self-replication appears always at the very beginning because it looks like it's the best way that nature, at the very least, has figured out to preserve and accumulate information over a long time. You can essentially see—we try to explain in the paper as well and show that it happens there—some things can happen even before there are self-replicators, but until there's a self-replicator, it's just a dynamical system. And when there's the first self-replicator arising, then you start accumulating information that gets repeated over time. And then you can think about biology and nature and evolution, essentially, as a fight among many different self-replicators that try to compete for limited resources. And what you'll observe in the current world is essentially the most efficient self-replicators for any given niche that you observe on planet Earth.

Ettore Randazzo: (6:38)

Maybe I'm overextending my claims here, but one could even claim that intelligence evolved as a way to self-replicate better.

Luca Versari: (6:49)

It doesn't mean it's the only way that you can get to intelligence, but at the very least, we know that nature did it this way. So it would be, let's say, unwise to not explore this direction.

Nathan Labenz: (6:52)

Cool. So I also came away from the paper with maybe one other sense of why it matters, which is that it seems that prior to the appearance of self-replicators, the systems as a whole are in some ways just noisy, and the most interesting complex dynamics only seem to emerge in the presence of multiple self-replicators. Maybe I'm over-reading that aspect of the paper, but that seemed to be pretty important. And it almost seemed like there was an implicit value judgment in that. I don't know how you guys feel about that, but it seemed like there is something that we value—this sort of higher level of complexity—on some level, as opposed to the more noisy reality before self-replicators.

Luca Versari: (7:55)

I think that one way that you can think about what happens before is that it's almost like noise, essentially. There are things that happen, there are complex behaviors that are going on, but if they cannot be preserved and continued, they are just transient. And when you have some way to preserve information and also to reproduce—so to have more of you that do the same thing—then you start observing it with more and more frequency. And then, of course, there's the second part of it, which is: once you've got self-replication and once you are competing for space, evolution kicks in, and then you can really start to have more complexification of behaviors, because competition and collaboration really help with that.

Nathan Labenz: (8:35)

Yeah, gotcha. Okay, so the study that we're going to go deep on here is—if I were to describe the motivation to someone, I would say these guys set out to find the very smallest, simplest environment that they could possibly come up with that could still give rise to self-replicators. Is that a fair characterization? Was that the actual motivation that you had coming into this?

Ettore Randazzo: (9:03)

So on one hand, for sure, simplicity is a motivating factor. In fact, what I consider one of the selling points of this paper is that we have an environment that doesn't explicitly favor the existence of self-replicators. Self-replicators just appear, but we're not looking for that. So it's really hard to talk about what the simplicity of an environment is. There are many ways to define that. What I think actually got us into this was when one of our co-authors did the first experiment and we saw this phenomenon of things suddenly getting into this state very suddenly, without asking for it, without anything. And we found that fascinating. That's what I think is the most important part: there are systems in which we don't ask for a replicator, it just—there is some spontaneous evolution that creates structures that are complex enough to copy themselves. And that's the part that is interesting.

Luca Versari: (10:14)

One reason that we don't want to focus too much on the simplicity—although simplicity really matters, of course, because you don't want to study too complex things—is you can think about a simple system where you've got a copy operation, and then everything can be thought of as a self-replicator. But that's uninteresting, or at least it's not interesting to think about how did we get from nothing to self-replicators. I think the most important point on what we are trying to show here is how we can pass from a period which has, let's say, a random soup of programs that do nothing and are randomly initialized, through a transition that goes into a period where there are self-replicators. How this happens and why is part of what we're trying to explore here.

Ettore Randazzo: (10:55)

Yes, and this work doesn't go into the why yet. We are doing follow-up work that tries to figure out exactly what is going on. But for now, we just thought it was so interesting that we couldn't not share with the world that we have this kind of phenomenon.

Nathan Labenz: (11:12)

I think there was a quite interesting, almost philosophical note in the paper where, on the one hand, you're looking for some measure, right, to characterize these systems, and the extremes are both uninteresting. Noise, pure noise, is hard to compress, but that doesn't make it fundamentally interesting. And then on the other extreme, pure order—a pure crystal lattice or whatever that's totally regular—is high order, but also not super interesting. And so you end up looking for something in the middle that has the Goldilocks properties of interesting complexity.

Maybe you can give more kind of motivation or theory or philosophy behind this, but I didn't have a great sense for exactly how principled that idea is. Maybe you can, first of all, just define the metric that you ended up using and then give a little more color on: could reasonable people disagree on whether that's a good metric? How should we think about this metric of complexity?

Ettore Randazzo: (12:15)

Okay. So first, let me just note that I have a bit of a background in information theory and compression, which has colored some of the ideas behind this specific definition of complexity. And of course, another important note is that I think you could have discussions for years about what complexity actually means.

So what I wanted to capture when using this definition of complexity was basically trying to have a somewhat mathematical definition for structure—like, amount of structure that is present in a string or something else. Of course, as you mentioned, this notion of structure has some issues because too much structure is also not too interesting. And I think that the metric we ended up defining has a reasonable trade-off between over-emphasizing structure and ignoring structure entirely.

Anyway, so the metric we ended up going with is—at least theoretically, and I'm not actually giving an exact definition because there are a lot of details that one needs to get right—but intuitively, the idea is to consider the difference between the Shannon entropy and the Kolmogorov complexity of the data that we have. Now, why would someone do this?

Intuitively, one can think of Shannon entropy as: how hard would it be to describe this string of characters if I were completely ignoring any kind of structure that it may possibly have? For example, a sequence of half A's and half B's has the same Shannon entropy, regardless of whether it first has all the A's and then all the B's, or whether they are just mixed together completely randomly. Shannon entropy is a measure that completely ignores structure.

Kolmogorov complexity is basically sitting at the opposite end. It's saying, what's the shortest description you could give of this thing? You can do whatever you want—any Turing machine—what's the shortest Turing machine that will produce this thing as output? So Kolmogorov complexity absolutely can tell the difference between "first all the A's and then all the B's" versus "alternating A's and B's."

So then the idea of taking the difference is that one ignores the structure, the other one lets you take any amount of structure into consideration. So what is left is basically only the structure. So that's the main motivation for the definition.

I think it may also be a good idea to make an analogy with the real world that maybe will help to clarify the definition a bit. So imagine you have a building. A building contains a lot of molecules, a lot of different materials, a lot of different things. And you can imagine the equivalent of Shannon entropy would be something that tries to define the position of the molecules independently from the context of a building. The equivalent of Kolmogorov complexity would basically be: here's the blueprint of the building, and given the blueprint, you know how to build this building. So that tells you what the building is—it's a description of the building.

Now imagine that you take the same building and you completely destroy it and it becomes just a pile of rubble. The pile of rubble has the same molecules, so it has the same entropy, but it doesn't have a simple description like a blueprint. If you wanted to get the same pile of rubble, you would need to know where all the random small pieces sit. So because of that, in this analogy, the pile of rubble would have a significantly lower complexity or structure. And that's more or less the intuitive reason why I think that defining complexity in this way makes sense for what one wants to emphasize: the amount of structure that there is.

Nathan Labenz: (16:10)

Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

Is there a philosophical extension to that or implication of that? When I read this paper and just look at these graphs where it shows complexity rising through time as the dynamics of the system evolve—we'll get to the actual details of the nature of the system in a second—but I really was left with this feeling that there is some implicit value judgment over these states. And I don't know if that's something you would want to sign onto or not, but it brings to mind these various thought experiments for me.

If I understand correctly, a tiled universe of happy people—if you were a utilitarian, you might say, oh geez, if I had this one very happy person and I made a zillion copies of them and filled the whole universe with this same thing over and over again, that would be great because all these people would all be happy and we would count up their utility and have very high utility, so fantastic. And then somebody else might say, doesn't that sound kind of boring? Shouldn't there be some sort of discount for the fact that this same thing is taking up all the space? Don't we want more diversity for its own sake?

It seems like this measurement that you've defined implicitly suggests that second frame. Is that fair, or would you not go that far?

Ettore Randazzo: (17:36)

I have to say we did not assign any value judgments or philosophical implications to this definition of complexity. We did not consider that. In fact, I would be somewhat surprised if this definition of complexity becomes useful outside of this paper. Pleasantly surprised, but still surprised.

So one thing I want to say is that this is a measure of structure, right? It's not a measure of value, and it doesn't take into account diversity. It's not a measure of utility, right? So it's just a measure of structure. Because of that—

Nathan Labenz: (18:07)

Wait, just quick interjection. There is some way in which it counts diversity, right?

Ettore Randazzo: (18:17)

To some extent, yes. So it's a bit hard to explain exactly how repetition gets taken into account by this measure. This middle ground is the best point. As in, if you have no repetition at all, then very likely this complexity will be low. On the other hand, if you have a fully repeating N copies of the same character, for example, then the measure complexity will also be very low. So you do want some amount of repetition, and ideally repetition that itself has some structure, but not too much.

But that doesn't imply that—you can still have a repetition of one relatively complex structure that's just the same but repeated a lot of times, and that will have high complexity. So it's a bit of a trade-off. If you have too much repetition, complexity is low. If you have too little repetition, complexity is low. In the experiments we have been doing, since programs are 64 bytes, that turned out to be a reasonable trade-off, and high complexity effectively correlates extremely well with a soup that's full of self-replicators.

Nathan Labenz: (19:32)

And to be clear, this is also purely a measure, right? This measure of complexity is not being fed back into the system in any way, shape, or form.

Ettore Randazzo: (19:42)

Yeah.

Luca Versari: (19:42)

Correct.

Ettore Randazzo: (19:43)

Also, I think I have to make the disclaimer: Kolmogorov complexity is not something you can actually compute. So we're not actually using Kolmogorov complexity—it's just mathematically easier to reason about Kolmogorov complexity than it is to reason about whatever other proxies for Kolmogorov complexity you may end up using.

Luca Versari: (20:05)

Okay. About the complexity metrics that we used, we have also used something else, which is counting the number of unique tokens that arise in the soup. And this would mean that if you've got a self-replicator that takes over, we don't count the reproduction of this self-replicator to another string as creating new tokens. And this shows that when self-replicators arise, you see a very stark decrease in the number of unique tokens that are in the soup. And we checked, and this is very well correlated with this other complexity metric. So you can think about us using this higher-order entropy metric as a proxy for this unique token count, because of course it's much easier to compute.

Nathan Labenz: (20:45)

Gotcha. Yeah, that's a very good point. One of you guys can take just setting up: what is the little micro, self-contained universe that you've created? And I'll ask any clarifying questions that I have.

Luca Versari: (20:58)

So the very simplest experiment that we performed is as follows. Imagine that you have a soup of random strings. The random strings represent code, but they can also represent data. Those are essentially what you would pass to a compiler to execute some code, to a computer. And what we say is: you randomly take a pair of strings, concatenate them, and execute the code starting from the very bottom-left. And you execute the code for a long time, and then you just split the strings again and put them back into the soup. Now repeat this many times and have a lot of strings do that in parallel.

So this is the only thing that happens in the simplest setup. You just take two random strings, concatenate them, execute them, and then split them again. So there's no objective function whatsoever. There's nothing else that happens from our side, at least in one of the possible setups. And the only thing that happens is that those strings modify themselves by reading each other's code and modifying code.

Ettore Randazzo: (22:05)

Let me show you an example, which is also the example that captivated us into digging deeper into this. Let's see.

Okay, so here you can see a few programs from the soup. Each program is 64 bytes. This is one program. There are two columns, not for any particular reason—it's just that it makes better use of space. And you can see that most of the bytes are random, and there are a few bytes—you can see the ones here that are highlighted—that actually represent instructions, and everything else is just nothing. There is also a special character that represents the byte zero, which is special, and you can probably see that here. I'm not sure how well it's visible across the video, but it's a null byte.

Okay, so if we let these programs randomly execute, you can see that they start modifying themselves, and sometimes some strings appear—like copies of the same character, or maybe the ends of the string gain some characters, lose some characters. There's also a few mutations that just erase things from here and there. This evolution continues. There's a lot of interesting behaviors. There are things that extend, things that—for now, there's nothing too interesting that is happening.

By the way, this is the same example that is explained in the paper, in Figure 2, I believe, where there is like a story of the replicators that appear here. So somewhere around now, you notice there was a lot of activity, and that activity left a lot of null bytes around. Now you can see here we have a count of how frequent each byte is, and you can see that the null byte now is way more common than it was before. And if you just go back a couple of seconds—okay, if you go back a couple of seconds, there are basically no null bytes that are not special, but in the time of just a very short number of executions, there are a lot of null bytes.

After that, there is another little bit of nothing too interesting happening. And then somewhere around now, we get actual replicators. And this explodes into a lot of activity. And at the end—right now it's paused, but at the end—you can see that there is the same structure that repeats itself basically everywhere in the soup with some minor modifications. So seeing this for the first time is what gave us the intuition that there was something interesting happening here—this kind of weird evolution over time, different behaviors, and all of this.

Luca Versari: (24:55)

So what happens before self-replicators arise is actually not completely random. There's a distribution of characters that changes from the very beginning. You can think of it as just a complex dynamical system where there are operations that are going on, but in this transient way that is not stable until self-replicators arise. And this is, if you were to talk about it in the origins of life terminology, you could think about this as being the pre-life period—a period where there are dynamic interactions, usually in that case it would have been with some catalysts that catalyze each other or create some complex dynamics, until the point where self-replicators arise. And then this moves into what sometimes is called the life period, where self-replicators arise.

And the important part there is that things happen also in the pre-life period, but whenever there are self-replicators, this change is very stark. There's a very big transition in dynamics, and that's why it's useful to think about it in these terms. So our paper is mostly focused on: how do we get to this transition? How do we get from a random soup to something as complex as self-replicators?

Nathan Labenz: (26:08)

So for the uninitiated, which included myself up until very recently, let's take just a little bit more time on what we were just looking at there. And you can maybe even pull it back up again just to have the thing on the screen. So you start off with just this totally random set of strings, each of which are 64 characters.

Luca Versari: (26:29)

Mm-hmm.

Nathan Labenz: (26:29)

So that's worth just pausing on for a second to say that is a remarkably small number of characters for anything really interesting to happen, but that's the whole thing, right? You've got 64 characters. And if I understand correctly, you're literally generating these out of ASCII characters at total random?

Ettore Randazzo: (26:47)

Not ASCII. Just bytes, but yes.

Nathan Labenz: (26:55)

Okay, random, independently, uniformly—every character is selected independently from everything else?

Ettore Randazzo: (26:47)

Yes.

Nathan Labenz: (26:55)

Gotcha. And then the way that this is going to be interpreted—I'd never actually heard of this before—is through this extremely minimalistic programming language with the charming name of Brainfuck.

Ettore Randazzo: (27:09)

Yes.

Nathan Labenz: (27:09)

And this is prior art, right? This is something that somebody made to try to say: what is the smallest possible computing paradigm that we could imagine?

Then stop me at any point here if I'm wrong, but what actually happens is you have a two-head computer that both start in the first position, if I understand correctly. When you take two strings, you put them together. Now, why do you take two strings and put them together? That's essentially simulating the randomness of the universe, right? We've got molecules bouncing around, Brownian motion in solution, whatever—a gas, whatever they're doing, they're bouncing around and they're bumping into each other at essentially random, right? Or at least we're modeling it as being random in this case.

So you take two of these strings out and just simulate an interaction, and you just arbitrarily—tell me if there's more to it, but it seems arbitrary that we just concatenate them. And then we'll treat this as if it were Brainfuck language. There are only, looks like, ten different commands in the entire language, and all the other characters out of the 256 possible bytes—all the other things are just considered to be neutral data.

And then the commands that can happen are: okay, you've got these two computer heads that both start at zero. One thing to do is move a head from place to place. You literally just move them one square over, right? So it's move one to the left, move one to the right. There is increment and decrement of value. So you have a value—I guess that assumes that there's an order to the bytes as well? Or do you just increase the bit value by one? So the heads can only move one position, one step at a time, and the bytes can only move one value at a time?

Ettore Randazzo: (29:07)

Yes.

Nathan Labenz: (29:07)

Then you can also copy from one position to the other?

Ettore Randazzo: (29:07)

Yes. There is the most important instruction, the one that actually makes this language Turing complete. Just for full disclosure, this is not exactly Brainfuck. This is very close to Brainfuck, but the standard Brainfuck language only has one head, and then the input and output—like the copy operations—read and write things to the terminal for humans to interact with. But in this setup, there are no humans, so it makes sense to have two heads that modify things themselves.

So let me show you. This is a representation of an execution of a program. There are actually three characters, not two. The two heads have to do with the position that you read and write from. The third head is the position of the next command that you execute, which is fundamental. In particular, the next command that you execute—that head is the only one that can move by more than one position per step. And those are the square brackets.

What the square brackets do is—when you execute that instruction, if the character at, I think the blue head, but I'm not sure if I remember correctly, is zero (and that's why zero has a special representation), then you skip that execution. You skip those brackets if you are going in one direction, or just go through. If it's not zero, you jump to the other bracket. So that's how you can implement things like conditions and for loops and all of those things, which is what allows for this language to be Turing complete.

Luca Versari: (30:55)

Just one note. Brainfuck is not necessarily the smallest language that would be Turing complete. It was created, as far as I understand, to make it very hard for humans to code in it. You can have even simpler instruction sets that are still Turing complete.

Nathan Labenz: (31:12)

Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

I just want to make sure that people have a very—maybe not full understanding, but at least an intuitive sense for—

Ettore Randazzo: (31:26)

Mm-hmm.

Nathan Labenz: (31:26)

Just like the sort of universe that we're operating in here. So let me just try to say it back to you one more time. There are three computer heads that operate over this ultimate space. When two different strings are attached together, they go from 64 to now combined 128. So you've got 128 bytes. Three positions: two can read, write, and be moved left or right and can increment or decrement, and the other one is the one that handles the commands. That one is the one that can bounce around when it hits these open and close parenthesis type operators. And I guess there are maybe two more things that matter here. One is the definition of a self-replicator. That is when the first 64 bytes manage to copy themselves over to the second 64 bytes exactly.

Ettore Randazzo: (32:21)

Mostly. It's slightly more complicated because they need to copy themselves to the other 64. The thing that could happen is you have the other 64 bytes be the copy of the original program, but destroy the original program while doing so. And that would not be a self-replicator. It's just something that moves.

Luca Versari: (32:41)

Also, to make things more complex, a self-replicator doesn't have to be only 64 bytes, only if its entirety is 64 bytes. You could copy a smaller part of this substring, let's say, of the 64 bytes many times, and this will still count as a self-replicator. So it's actually quite complex to tell whether you have created a copy of yourself as a substring, because it's not just saying 64 bytes on the left need to be equal to 64 bytes on the right. It could be that it's like 13 bytes on the left that get replicated at a very random position on the other side, or some of them that get replicated many times in this 128-byte concatenated string. And this makes it even more important to figure out a complexity metric to understand what's going on, because it's very hard to detect explicitly for a perfect self-replicator otherwise.

Ettore Randazzo: (33:33)

Yeah. The way I like to think about it is that it's hard to say whether one program is a self-replicator, but it's a lot easier to say whether the soup is full of self-replicators.

Luca Versari: (33:46)

And it's even more complex than this, because in some experiments we have one single long tape where there's no concept of individual strings. So to determine whether there's a self-replicator there, you cannot avoid it. You really need to think about where are the sites which can be anything for a substring, which is a self-replicator, and how do you tell whether a self-replicator is replicating in any given offset?

Nathan Labenz: (34:09)

And that's basically just an experimental variant where instead of having these discrete units and merging them randomly, you just literally run the program indefinitely over the one super long string of characters?

Ettore Randazzo: (34:24)

I believe the way that setup works is that periodically you stop the program and you start it again from a random point.

Luca Versari: (34:31)

Yes. But I think that thinking about this example is the simplest, and there are also extensions which are putting one dimension or two dimensions into the equation. So it's no more uniform distribution, but it's a uniform distribution among your neighbors, but it doesn't change the concept. Thinking about just having uniform distribution of random strings concatenating should work.

Nathan Labenz: (34:53)

Gotcha. Okay. And then the one other thing that I wanted to note is that there is the possibility for errors in these programs. Right? Since the data was all generated randomly in the first place, when you try to run this random string of characters as a program, it can error out. And specifically, it seems like it errors out if the sort of control logic breaks. If it hits one of a particular special character, which is the zero character, and it's meant to look for the next or the last parenthesis to handle control logic and there isn't a corresponding proper place for it to go to, then that's basically just the end of that run. Is that right? And everything that happened up until that time, all changes that are made, those are just left in place and we move on to the next step in the simulation.

Ettore Randazzo: (35:44)

We tried a few different setups. The overall result doesn't change that much anyway. But yes, I believe in this setup, if you encounter a jump instruction that doesn't have anything to jump to, it just stops execution. And there are a few other things, like if you end up trying to execute past the end of the string, it also stops execution because what would it execute anyway? But in general, one important thing is, and also one of the reasons why we are using Brainfuck and not C++, is that we want interpretation of programs to be as permissive as we reasonably can. If you don't do that, then basically you never actually get anything interesting because it just errors out every single time.

Nathan Labenz: (36:31)

Okay. So I think that's a pretty good overview of the setup. It's both remarkably simple in some ways and obviously has some nuance. Let's talk about what happens as you run these things. I think you've alluded to it a little bit already, but essentially you have this pre-life or at least pre-self-replicator period in which everything is still random and these things are being concatenated, they're being run, data's changing. Can you tell us a little bit more about what evolution of the overall system you can see during that phase? And then there's a very sharp phase change, and I think this notion of phase change is a really important one that happens when the first self-replicator pops up. And again, probably can't stress enough, there's no incentive for this self-replicator to pop up. Right? No loss function here like we're used to thinking about in AI systems, literally just blind execution of the program stumbles on through random interaction between two strings, something that is a self-replicator. And now when that happens, very quickly it starts to replicate a lot, and now we're into a different regime in the overall story of this little universe.

Ettore Randazzo: (37:50)

So since we initialize everything with random bytes, in the beginning everything is random. Right? So you can see, okay, so this is already after a few executions, it's not exactly quite uniformly distributed, but here we have the least common character and here we have the most common character, and you can see they are pretty close to each other. No character appears more than half a percent of the time. So the first thing that happens in the first few thousand executions is that this distribution shifts. And you can see here after a few thousand times that programs interact with each other, we start having a few characters that appear like 2% of the time. We are still investigating exactly what is happening here. There's clearly something that is important. Here we can see that this character, this is one of the characters that moves the heads, for example, is getting particularly popular, and some characters also become particularly unpopular more than others. It's not like there's just one character that becomes significantly more common. It's also that other characters become less common. And then we have some of these state transitions, we were saying, where the behavior changes significantly. Here there's a lot of activity for a really short time, and that leaves you with a completely different distribution. And some characters almost completely disappear.

Luca Versari: (39:17)

And there's one interesting thing that one of our co-authors observed that you can think about the initial distribution where you got some operations which are code that you can execute and other operations which are just data. So if you try to execute there, nothing happens. So even at the very beginning, the only thing that can generate more code is code itself. And since the very beginning, in this kind of system, the number of instructions that get executed and that are present in the soup starts increasing immediately. So even before having self-replicators actually appearing, we still have something that could be very similar to the concept of autocatalytic sets, where those codes, strings of codes, or pairs of codes generate other pairs of codes that then can have a chance of generating themselves again.

Nathan Labenz: (40:03)

Yeah. That's really interesting. I'm noticing just looking at the top of this that it seems that both the highest frequency characters, although maybe not that equal sign.

Ettore Randazzo: (40:16)

No, the equal sign.

Nathan Labenz: (40:17)

If I'm reading this right, I'm seeing the open arrow is the 4.94%. Right?

Ettore Randazzo: (40:22)

Yes. So here we have the 16 most common characters and the 16 least common characters. It is quite interesting indeed that plus and minus tend to be not that interesting, but I think perhaps that makes sense because if you execute a plus, that will likely make an open parenthesis into a completely different character. So that's likely to ruin meaningful code. And the pieces of code that are useful to copy, like the instructions that are useful to copy things over, like the loop instructions, the instructions that move the heads, and the copy instruction are super common. At least we believe that because if you have a lot of copy instructions, then it's easy to produce more copy instructions because you will just read something and that something is probably a copy instruction itself, so you will copy that over. And this is a self-reinforcing effect. Having many copy instructions just gets you even more copy instructions. And probably there is something similar happening with loop instructions.

Nathan Labenz: (41:29)

Yeah. Cool. That's fascinating unto itself. The instructions that enable copying tend to get copied, and the ones that scramble data tend to scramble themselves out of existence. And this is before we've even got to self-replicators. Now, I guess one could ask, is there a sharp line between this notion of, you even raised the concept of an autocatalytic set, is there a bright line between that and a self-replicator? It seems like there is because there's a phase transition. But when I just look at a pair of characters could be in a sense enough, right, for it to be copying itself over, I feel like I'm missing some critical distinction there.

Luca Versari: (42:11)

Yes. I think I can help here. So there are also people that would very easily call autocatalytic sets self-replicators. It's a matter of how efficient they are, because the biggest difference between the pre-life and the life period is the speed of, let's say, information to be replicated and copied into their neighborhood. When you've got the pre-life period, you got some autocatalytic sets that happen, but they're very slow in copying each other, also because they need to do many more steps before they become multiple of what they were before. And it's also by chance. But when you get a functional self-replicator, in biology the best example is like something that people suspect being the RNA with the polymerase and the ribosome, then this just speeds up very quickly and then in much shorter timelines it takes over the entire soup.

Ettore Randazzo: (43:04)

So I'm looking at the paper. There is a Figure 1 that shows us the number of unique tokens or even the complexity. And you can see that the number of unique tokens slowly decreases in initial phases because...

Nathan Labenz: (43:20)

Quick clarification. A token here is a 64-byte string?

Ettore Randazzo: (43:25)

No. A token is a marker that basically identifies, it's what Ettel was saying before with the tracking of copies. So number of unique tokens is the number of bytes that have not been copied.

Luca Versari: (43:43)

So a string there will be at the beginning 64 unique tokens because it's 64 bytes.

Ettore Randazzo: (43:49)

And then if you copy half of the string over itself, then you have 32 unique tokens because half of those bytes come from the other half of the string. So it's just keeping track of where the bytes originally came from.

Nathan Labenz: (44:05)

And you're actually keeping a full log of every copy event.

Ettore Randazzo: (44:09)

We did it once. Let's put it that way. But yes, this number of tokens takes into account the history of every byte and looks at where it came from. And if the token came from the same byte, then it's the same token.

Luca Versari: (44:23)

There's one caveat which here becomes quite important. So far we've talked about mutation being the driving factor of self-replicators to arise. And this can be proven even by just having experiments where there's absolutely zero background noise. So the only way to modify some characters is to execute the code. But we usually also add background noise. So every now and then, some characters get randomly modified. This helps to speed up the process and so you need to find some replicators which are more robust, but it's not necessary. We still observe everything happening even without background noise. What you're seeing here in this graph shows that unique tokens decrease and that's also because, sorry, they decrease, but there's the impact also of adding unique tokens every now and then that counterbalances.

Ettore Randazzo: (45:13)

Yes. So if you look here, once we do have a self-replicator, the amount of unique tokens increases. That's obviously not possible if you don't add new tokens every now and then. So this increase here is the effect of mutation. So what is interesting, tying back to the conversation we were having before, is that here the number of unique tokens, even before we have anything like a full-form self-replicator, is steadily decreasing. That's basically saying that there is a fair amount of copying that is happening even before we have actual self-replicators.

Nathan Labenz: (45:53)

So that first line, the first self-replicator pops up, is obviously a big event in the history of the system. You've got a major drop in unique tokens. You've got a huge rise in top 32 tokens, and that is, should I understand that as the sourced back to an original initial token?

Ettore Randazzo: (46:14)

I believe that...

Nathan Labenz: (46:16)

A character that has been copied the most?

Ettore Randazzo: (46:18)

Yeah. Basically, top 32 tokens is basically saying how many copies exist of the 32 most common bytes. So as you can see here, there is a sharp increase because at this point we have a self-replicator that copies itself a lot. And by byte, I don't mean like byte value. I mean original byte.

Nathan Labenz: (46:39)

So then the complexity also spikes because we go from a noisy environment to a more ordered environment, and then it drops back down. And should I understand that as being a period of tiling? Is this where we've overshot and gone to the other extreme in complexity where the self-replicator is everywhere for a while?

Ettore Randazzo: (47:04)

Actually, no. So let's see if I can find the moment corresponding to that point here in the video. I believe it was here. So that's basically an extinction event.

Nathan Labenz: (47:16)

I'm still on the graph.

Ettore Randazzo: (47:19)

Yeah. Okay. So in a few seconds, you will see there is going to be a lot of movement, and then nothing will happen after one second of a lot of movement. And that's the spike. See? Here, there was a lot of changes, and now everything is stopped. Yes, there is still some modifications, but it looks like it would at the beginning, right? It doesn't look like the self-replicator regime here. When you do have successful self-replicators, there is a lot of movement around. And you can see that, but only for a really short time. And that's the time that corresponds to this spike, because then you have replicators take over, but they are this initial kind of replicators that we have here as an example. And the interesting property of these replicators is that if the bytes that they are trying to write themselves over are zero, they just don't do anything. If they try to overwrite a set of bytes of any kind, it works. You can see here that it's just slowly copying itself in reverse. But if the bytes you had there are actual zeros, then it doesn't work out. So it just doesn't do anything. And so what this does, and you can see this in the soup here, what this does is basically, very quickly, you have every single byte at the end of the strings be a null byte. You see here. And now the replicators cannot replicate themselves anymore. And so basically the replicators go extinct. Nothing happens. And then afterwards, we find a different kind of replicator that doesn't have this problem, that manages to copy itself over null bytes without any problem. And because of that, you have the second state transition here. The soup becomes entirely self-replicators, and the complexity just jumps up. So this is basically just a short extinction event, and it doesn't happen always for that matter. In most of our experiments, we just see a sharp jump in self-replicators, and that's it. It's just that we were lucky enough that the standard setup ended up having this particularly interesting example, which is the one that we ended up showing here. But it doesn't always happen. The most typical event is just that as soon as you have one replicator, the soup takes over and there's no extinction event in the middle.

Luca Versari: (49:56)

Not one replicator, in the sense that we have actually also tested the hypothesis of if you had one replicator initialized in the soup, what's the chance that it takes over? And it's actually quite low. It's what, 23%? Because there are many things that can happen that destroy a self-replicator. If there's background noise, while they self-replicate, they might just be destroyed by the noise. And if there is no background noise, you might be in the wrong order when you try to replicate. So if another string is the one on the left and it starts from this random code, it might destroy you, and therefore you will not self-replicate. So there's actually low chance for one self-replicator to take over.

Ettore Randazzo: (50:36)

In particular, we didn't test this because as we said, it's hard to see if one program is a self-replicator. But what we expect is that there actually have appeared other self-replicators here that just died. What is remarkable about this specific evolution is that self-replicators took over a fair bit and then still died.

Nathan Labenz: (51:01)

Gotcha. So can you give a little bit of, I don't know if a taxonomy is too much to ask, of the different kinds of self-replicators that arise? I might be over-interpreting the graph, but I came away with the sense that there are some primitive ones that pop up first, but then they have these problems with zero. And so they sometimes fizzle out and then more robust ones come later, but maybe they take longer to emerge. But maybe I'm telling more of a story there than I should. Maybe it's more random actually than all that narrative that I just laid out.

Ettore Randazzo: (51:39)

So Ettel and I have observed different kinds of self-replicators. So here you can see the first replicator to appear in that setup, and it has this structure where it starts a loop, and then it first copies the characters, then moves the two heads, and then loops back. So you can see here the execution, right? So when it's executing this character, it copies this space to here. Then it moves the green head back, sorry, the blue head by one position. It moves the red head forward by one position, and it says, this is not zero. Let's loop back. Sorry, this is not zero. That's the byte that gets checked. And so here it repeats, and so now it just copies itself over. And as I was saying before, this has the problem that if it tries to copy itself over, when it does this check of okay, should I go back here? And so this is zero, so now I will just go forward and then nothing interesting happens. The second replicator that appears is somewhat more resilient, and it's fundamentally still the same thing. Right? It still does a loop. It still moves the two heads. But the difference is, I don't know if you noticed this, but the order of the heads is swapped. So here you write to the blue head, and here you write to the red head. So what this means is that having zeros in the string you're trying to overwrite doesn't give you problems. You do get problems if you have zeros in the string you're trying to copy. If this were a zero, then you failed at copying yourself because you just copied the first part of the program. You don't copy the entire program. And note that the program is copying itself in reverse order. When execution starts from the next program, it starts from here. So it's important to copy these first few bytes. The image doesn't go to the end of the execution, just shows the first few steps of execution because it takes a while. Yeah, the replicator will eventually manage to copy this part over to this part, and so you get an actual copy of the full replicator. But with this one, there is, as I said, this problem that if you have a zero byte in between the two halves of the self-replicator, then it doesn't actually copy itself. Now, that's not as much of a problem as it is for the other replicator, because there is a difference between I need to have a null byte myself and the program I copy myself to has a null byte. If you have even just one self-replicator that doesn't have a null byte, then it will succeed at copying itself over, and so it will survive way more easily. But the problem is if the, let's call it, food or rest of the soup is full of zeros, then this self-replicator cannot copy itself at all. But what sometimes appears after a longer evolution is this one. Specifically, this is handcrafted, but there are other replicators that sometimes appear that are resistant to zeros, both in the destination and in the source. Usually they contain nested loops, so it's a bit harder to explain here what is going on. So this is still the same replicator that we had in the previous example, the more successful replicator, but around it there is an additional loop. And what this loop does is just suppose I exit from the first loop because I happen to have found a zero byte, then let's just take the zero byte, decrement it or increment it, whatever. Now it's not a zero byte anymore. So let's jump back and get back into the previous loop. So this is one of the reasons why I was saying that it's hard to define what a self-replicator is, because at the end of the execution of this program, neither of the halves of the self-replicator is the same as the original program, because this null byte is not a null byte anymore in the original program, and in the new program is also not a null byte. But still, you would say that this program copied itself, right? Because the important parts copied themselves.

Luca Versari: (55:56)

And this program is also very robust to noise, by the way. So in noisy environments, this is particularly good because even if you can copy yourself perfectly, you can have a random mutation that could destroy other programs. But for a random mutation to destroy you, it has to be in the few operations that you have in this case on...

Ettore Randazzo: (56:16)

The left.

Luca Versari: (56:16)

We also observed that in other languages there's this typical behavior of self-replicators that if there's nothing else that has a pressure, they try to become shorter and shorter. This specific one is tricky because actually it's a specular self-replicator for the nuances that this Brainf**k variant has, but in other languages that would be relevant. And we've also observed that different kinds of self-replicators that use different operations take over in other languages that, for example, are CPU instruction-based. But I want to stress out that the main focus of this paper was to focus on how you get out of the pre-life period. So we didn't explore nearly as much what happens after the first self-replicator arrives. This is something that we very much care about, but for future work.

Ettore Randazzo: (57:04)

Yes. We just have some observations of more resilient self-replicators appearing over time.

Nathan Labenz: (57:10)

There were at least three classes. Tell me if I missed any. There's an initial one that, maybe I shouldn't order them, but there's working from least to most resilient: there is one that can copy itself, but if it hits a zero where it's trying to copy to, it fails.

Ettore Randazzo: (57:30)

Mhmm.

Nathan Labenz: (57:31)

There's one that is highly susceptible to mutations in its own code and can fail as a result of that. And then there's the robust kind that can both write over the zeros and is much more tolerant of mutations in its own space as well. And we know that all these things can arise. How often do multiple of these things arise? I guess you just said there's more future work to do to play out from the emergence of these things to the long-term dynamics. But how often do we see multiple different things battling it out versus is this like one replicator's lonely struggle for survival, or are they doing battle with each other frequently enough?

Ettore Randazzo: (58:17)

It's a bit complicated to evaluate, especially in the multidimensional setups. Interactions are a lot more sparse. And since interactions are a lot more local, there is space for niches to appear and evolve in different directions in different places, and then they start fighting with each other at the border and trying to take over other self-replicators. But even in this dynamic setup where everything can interact with everything else, you can see that the structure is similar, but not that many self-replicators are identical, because the effect of mutations gives you this, where now everything is equal, but then once a replicator mutates a little bit, and then if that one starts getting copied a little more, then you have replicators that fight with each other. If one self-replicator became a lot more efficient than the other one, then they probably would just win. But in this setup, if you have multiple self-replicators that are similarly efficient, for example, if you look at these two, they are identical, except some of these random unused bytes here are different. Their efficiency is the same, but you will see a bunch of both kinds.

Nathan Labenz: (59:34)

Yeah. Interesting. And that's, if I understand correctly there, it's like you can have the same mechanism, but you can have different filler data. This is almost like junk DNA. I don't know that there is such a thing as junk DNA, but if you believe in the notion of junk DNA, this is the junk DNA of your universe.

Ettore Randazzo: (59:50)

Yes.

Nathan Labenz: (59:51)

So it's amazing how many concepts like that we are seeing in just this very small thing, right? We've got different mechanisms for self-replication. We've got mutations that can be deleterious or that can be survivable depending on the mechanism. We've got some notion of pollution with the zeros popping up that can become so common that they make it difficult for the self-replicators to succeed. We have the junk DNA. We have competition for niches and then fighting at the border. It's really an amazing, this is what kind of just captivated my imagination looking through these results, because it's like that is such a small universe in which to find so many of these advanced concepts. Is there any other kind of recognizable concept from the study of macroevolution that you have observed that we haven't touched on yet?

Ettore Randazzo: (1:00:57)

Actually, yes. At least one. So we have some interesting cases of something similar to symbiosis. This is in a different language. I don't think I should go into too many details because it would take a while. But the idea is that we have a different language, it's a variation of Brainfuck in which there is always one byte self-replicator that just copies just that one byte. So if a program starts with that byte, then that byte copies itself over. Maybe symbiosis is not the correct term, I don't know, I'm not a biologist, but what happens is that there is evolution that happens that starts to exploit that one-byte self-replicator until you get a self-replicator that is able to copy the entire string that uses that one-byte self-replicator. And because of this, because of the existence of this one-byte self-replicator and using this one-byte self-replicator, evolution is a lot faster than in a lot of other Brainfuck variants where you don't have this one-byte self-replicator. So it's like enabling further evolution just by being there. Then it's not a parasitic kind of relationship because the self-replicator still survives, but it's a sort of cooperative relationship.

Luca Versari: (1:02:16)

But some of our colleagues have also observed some early examples of parasitic behaviors in the environments. And this is very consistent with other research done in artificial life where if you get to these environments, you can have these waves of parasites that try to destroy some self-replicators that propagate in other directions.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:02:36)

Yeah, it's really remarkable. Basically, a lot of things we see from the world and like biology appear in this completely different setup. In fact, for me, it would be really interesting to manage to prove that this kind of evolution that we observe in our world is not something that is special to our world, but just happens naturally. It's a very natural thing to occur, and it's not that the world is special and that had a lot of coincidences that caused evolution to go the way it did. It's just even in simple setups or whatever. It would be really nice to prove that we manage to have this emergence of life, self-replication, whatever way you want to call it.

Nathan Labenz: (1:03:22)

That is maybe a good transition to some big picture philosophical questions that I have for you. One thing is just, it seems like most things go extinct. Should that be my understanding? You said even when you put in a self-replicator purposefully, there's still only like a 23% chance, I think you said, of it taking over. Do I understand correctly that the other 77% of the time, it's going extinct?

Luca Versari: (1:03:47)

Yes.

Nathan Labenz: (1:03:47)

And if I think of this through like a Robin Hanson Great Filter sort of lens, this sort of work would make me update my worldview away from the idea that the origin of life was the super hard step, or that the formation of self-replicators, maybe to be a little bit more generic or abstract in my terminology. And it makes me think more that a lot of things are probably popping up in the universe and fizzling out before they get to the point where they are putting up the sort of radio signals that we're putting out, or certainly starting to colonize space. Does that seem like a justified interpretation?

Ettore Randazzo: (1:04:28)

My way to think about that is, yes, once you have a self-replicator, you still have only one chance in five of actually doing something, but the chances of having a self-replicator in my opinion are even lower. It's just all steps are hard. And maybe if what we think of what's the simplest step is, okay, is a self-replicator, now it just needs to take over, that's already hard. Then maybe just on the other hand, it's just that all the other steps were even harder.

Luca Versari: (1:04:58)

But I want to be more of an optimist right now. Even in our experiments, even if it's only 23% the chance that one single self-replicator takes over, we observe a much higher than that chance that in 16,000 epochs self-replicators arise. So I think it's about 40% in the first 16,000 epochs, and you can go for much longer. So even if the individual one might not be the trigger for this state transition, it's still quite likely to happen. The real question that I think matters more is how close is this to what you observe in the real world, if you're interested in the biological implications of this. And there are many things that this thing doesn't have yet, for example, a clear way to accumulate complexity, because as you pointed out, we only have 64 bytes per string, and it's very difficult to go beyond that number because there's no easy way for strings to connect to each other in a stable way. And biology has that all the time. It can accumulate more and more complex strings, so we would want to explore directions which are similar to that as well if you want to try to assess how likely it is for life in biological worlds to happen. But there's still so many similarities that I think it's an interesting starting point.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:06:14)

You can see here there is a representation of how often you actually get a self-replicator, and within the first 16,000 steps, it happens like 40 to 60% of the time, which is quite remarkable because it's still all emerging from chaos. You would think that's less likely. Again, this is not the probability of self-replicator appearing. It's the probability of self-replicator taking over. This is, even if the first one doesn't succeed, then someone else will afterwards. That's the reasoning that you can have.

Nathan Labenz: (1:06:47)

So NA here means that it didn't happen.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:06:49)

It didn't happen at any point, and you can see that it didn't happen like 40, 60, 65 percent of the time. In this case, it's just so much noise that nothing could possibly happen. But in this setup, this is the setup in which you observe a self-replicator dying in 77 percent of cases. But even if it does die, then something else takes over anyway afterwards.

Nathan Labenz: (1:07:14)

That bit about the frequency of mutation is really interesting too. When you get up to that 1% mutation rate, then it becomes very hard for anything to persist. I was thinking that when I look at so much of the, at least the popular science discourse around life out somewhere in space, it sort of says, oh, this planet might have water and therefore it might be conducive to life. And unsaid there is "as we know it." And this work also makes me think that there's probably just a lot more space for life that who knows, right? It could be extremely weird, but I no longer feel like if you don't have water, you couldn't have life on that planet. Now I'm thinking you could have a gas giant that could have life in it, right? Who knows? It just seems like there's, if you can see this much complexity in this simple of a system, then I don't really have any reason to be prejudiced against what's going on at some depth in Jupiter. Maybe I would have some reason to think that like planets need an atmosphere or they need some sort of shield because they can't be just totally bombarded with crazy radiation that's going to cause too much noise in the system. But I feel like even at the level of substrate, I have to be pretty open-minded now in view of these results. You're nodding. Sounds like you interpret that similarly.

Luca Versari: (1:08:42)

Yeah. I mean, even with very high levels of radiation, you can still have life happening. It's just that it's going to be probably smaller, and even that would be interesting to observe. One extra thing that this shows, at least I think is an interesting direction, is sure you can think about what can happen in our universe, but we are not restricted to our universe when we do simulations. So what we are showing here is a completely different computational substrate, which has similarities to what biology can show, but we can do many different things. And we can really be creative here for trying to figure out how to create interesting and complex life in those directions, and ideally, ultimately intelligence as well.

Nathan Labenz: (1:09:23)

Perfect segue to one of my big questions, which is what should we take away from this for the purposes of understanding what the future of life and artificial intelligence turned to life might look like on our planet. My gut says, like again, I should just be very humble in terms of what my expectations are. If you can create something that looks this much like life in this tiny little space, then I think we're headed for a world in which some form of AI begins to self-replicate. We obviously have a very large digital ecosystem, computational environment for possible things to self-replicate through. And here, obviously, there's not intelligence involved, but if you add on intelligence and these sort of interesting primitives and put them in a big open space like we seem to be doing right now with open source models, this significantly increases my sense that whether it's Llama 3 or 3.1 or Llama 4 or whatever, that some version of this sort of thing pops up that has the recipe for self-replication. Possibly a mix of smart and dumb, but it just seems like the barrier to getting there is not nearly as high as people might be inclined to intuitively think.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:10:51)

So I think one thing that is important to keep in mind is that here we are getting this spontaneous emergence of self-replication, but that's through a lot of interactions. At the timescale at the end of the execution when we have the first self-replicators, we have seen 50 billion instructions executed. We run, I believe, 3 million pairs of programs, and yes, you can see that running in one million, but imagine if open source AI models gain the capability to self-replicate. Even if that were to happen, it would probably be quite unlikely for it to happen at the frequency and at the speed where we have timescales that are compatible with what we are observing here, which of course doesn't mean that it's something we shouldn't take into account. In particular, what I would be more concerned about is the risk of subsequent modifications, like imperfect self-replication just taking things farther away from its original intent and limitations or whatever properties we have. But I don't think that the insights we see here are particularly applicable to larger scale models that would execute at much slower speeds and with restrictions. And also the space that we let them execute in is significantly more unguarded in some sense. Here, we have a world in which you can just copy yourself over on any other string. And I do not know this, but I would expect that even for instance models would be quite hard for them to be able to just take over any random computer for the foreseeable future. If that were to happen, I would be concerned by other things first and then by the subsequent ability of evolution happening. I think we would have other problems.

Nathan Labenz: (1:13:01)

Can you put a little more detail on those other problems too?

Ettore Randazzo: (1:13:05)

I think, you know, that would imply that all of our computer infrastructure is utterly broken and security infrastructure and like any malicious actor could do the same.

Nathan Labenz: (1:13:14)

Oh, that's true, though, right?

Ettore Randazzo: (1:13:15)

Yeah. That's why I'm not that confident that it will not happen.

Nathan Labenz: (1:13:18)

It's not all broken, but it's like a lot broken.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:13:20)

Yes. That's fair.

Nathan Labenz: (1:13:21)

So you guys at Google live in a world of the best computer security infrastructure in the world by perhaps a significant margin, and the rest of us out here are barely updating our passwords. So I would say if the problem hinges on, or if the upshot would be that that would mean our security is bad, look no further than just how many different branches of the US government have been hacked at the highest levels. Like the White House has been hacked. Congress has been hacked. It's all been pretty thoroughly compromised. My working assumption is that we're all pretty well and thoroughly hacked.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:13:53)

That could be. I think that the biggest takeaway is not to underestimate the effect of subsequent modification over time. Like I don't think that open source models copying themselves over are even just the biggest risk of open source models themselves, but my work is not AI risks, and I don't think I'm qualified to make an actual statement on what people should be prepared for, but people should think about it.

Nathan Labenz: (1:14:21)

There's a lot of different vectors of attack and a lot of different ways that things could get pretty crazy. This just to me feels like one that people haven't considered nearly enough, and I'm not sure I couldn't even begin to put like a probability estimate on it. But whatever my implicit, non-explicitly calculated sense previously was, this does pull it in for me because I'm just like, man, there's just a lot going on here. The possibility of a sort of ecology rising in such a limited space, then I just look at the complexity and the vastness of the digital ecosystem that we have today. And I'm like, there's a lot of greenfield out there. Even if Google's systems are super secure, plenty are not. And it seems like there is at least some nontrivial possibility that you could have a digital ecology start to come online, or an AI ecology start to come online. And maybe that's even good. One of the things I always think about with life in general is just the fact that it is homeostatic and that there are these sort of many buffers that exist within any given system. Those things may be really good for us long term. We might be in a better situation if we have a more ecological model of open source AI versus a sterile planet that suddenly has something super powerful pop onto the scene and have a much larger chance of going to dominance. I have no idea really. It's very speculative, but this work has at least got me reconsidering with a more open mind, which I think is valuable. I might be totally going in the wrong direction, but it still feels like we're in this phase of time where these sorts of thought provokers, for those of us that do sit around trying to think about what's going to happen with AI, they're valuable regardless because we need to be more open-minded. We need to entertain the weird, I think, a lot more than we're naturally given to. So for me, this is a great spur in that direction.

Luca Versari: (1:16:21)

I mean, this goes back to the point that we were trying to make. Yes, we shouldn't underestimate the cascading effect of interactions. So if you have a self-replicator with a certain amount of mutation and then it mutates many times, the results can be unpredictable. But at the same time, we need to highlight that first of all, if you're just copying something which is equal to something else, so we have a perfect copy, nothing interesting would come up. And only when you're getting mutations and variants, then something interesting can happen. And this is very much an open problem that the field of artificial life in particular, but also deep learning and evolutionary strategies has been studying for a long time. We still don't know how to create unbounded complexity of behaviors. Right now, one very open question, even in this very small experiment that we have done is, would this have a limit in amount of complexity that it can show? Or how could we make it not have a limit in the amount of complexity? Most experiments that I'm aware of did eventually plateau at a certain level when they couldn't escape. So before ringing alarm bells and saying this might go all the way to a high level of intelligence, or like copying an LLM many times with variation would go to a high level of intelligence, we would need to have a much stronger belief and evidence that we can accumulate complexity in this way.

Nathan Labenz: (1:17:42)

Yes. Although we are making something that is extremely complicated and capable in a lab and putting it out there in a way that it can potentially interact with other things, right? The way I'm thinking about the open source AIs now, and I don't mean this to be in a prejudicial way of good or bad because I'm increasingly more open-minded to this notion that an AI ecology, should such a thing exist, might be protective or might be good in its own way. But this seems like we're certainly giving some future AI life forms like a major shortcut by building their brains for them and then releasing them into the wild. It seems like we've done one of the really hard parts of creating this future in a way that was not random, right? Obviously, we engineered these systems and figured out how to train these things. And so my kind of mental model, I wonder if you guys could attempt some simulations like this. I don't have nearly enough confidence in this domain to know exactly what this would look like, but I wonder if there would be a way to combine something that has intelligence with something that's really simple or primitive in the self-replication sense. Is there a way to look at, people are doing these sorts of things with "can an LLM, can GPT-4, can Gemini or whatever find zero-day exploits in software?" And I'm trying to close in on something that's like, man, you have these pretty simple self-replicators that seem to work here. And then separately, you have these language models that are able to code and able to assess code and debug code to varying degrees, of course. Is there a sort of symbiosis type model there that could make sense? Is there something in that mix that could be modeled in a closed environment that could shed light on what the future of open source just as it evolves through time might look like? I don't have the answer to that question, but I'd love it if you did.

Luca Versari: (1:19:44)

Oh, well, we don't have an answer, of course. But I think that the closer we get to high levels of intelligence, the more relevant trying to have a setup for understanding the risk becomes, and how we can control it. In our simple experiments, there's little to no risk that they can take over, especially because they cannot do more than modify 64 bytes. But if you get to more and more levels of complexity such as another LLM, then you really need to think about what you're doing. And I think that this should be taken quite seriously.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:20:12)

I have a maybe interesting point of view here. So first of all, if defining life is hard, defining intelligence is harder. I will not claim to have a definition of intelligence. When you say these things about can you find zero-day exploits with LLMs, some things like that, that makes me think I have a background in Computer Science Olympiads. And for that matter, there are actually sponsored experiments you've probably heard of. There is this AIMO. I don't know, is that something you're familiar with?

Nathan Labenz: (1:20:46)

I'm not immediately sure.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:20:47)

This is, I think, an extremely fascinating experiment. I am aware I'm digressing significantly from the main topic of the paper at this point. There is an extremely fascinating experiment where there is this International Mathematical Olympiad, and there are these efforts that try to get AI to just solve half of the problems in Math Olympiad. We are not there yet. Like I don't know if you want to classify ability of doing Mathematical Olympiads as intelligence. My opinion is it's correlated.

Nathan Labenz: (1:21:26)

Certainly some form of intelligence, exactly.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:21:28)

You can be intelligent even if you cannot do math olympiads, I would claim. But if you think of this kind of question, then I'm not even sure if we can actually say that the system is intelligent now. So when you say, okay, start mixing in self-replicators and intelligence, I don't think I even know how something like that would look like, if that makes sense.

Nathan Labenz: (1:21:50)

Yeah. That's fair enough. I tend to use a pretty functional definition of intelligence. The one that I've been using in very different types of conversations where I'm talking to business owners about using language models to automate tasks is that intelligence is the ability to perform useful work without fully precise instructions. So your number recognition is a great toy example that I tend to start with, the MNIST dataset, where you can recognize these numbers. Nobody knows how to write fully explicit code that can recognize numbers, but we can definitely train an AI to do it. That sort of ability to succeed when we don't have the full algorithm is, I think, an interesting functional definition. I'm not sure how much the definition really matters. I think what would matter maybe most in the context of the work that you guys are doing is, is there a way that you could mix in a language model or any sort of model, I think mostly language models, into a simulation like this in a way that makes the self-replicator much more likely to take over?

Ettore Randazzo: (1:22:59)

In fact, no, for a very simple reason. You are not going to be able to run a million iterations of a language model in any reasonable amount of time. Yeah. You need real compute for that. Probably you could do that experiment if you start using half of the computers on the planet, but arguably there are better things to do with half of the computers on the planet than just, you know, seeing if you get self-replicators slightly faster.

Nathan Labenz: (1:23:25)

Yeah. Although it depends on how much you think the AIs can help succeed, right? If they're really effective, then you might not need that much compute. We imagine ourselves taking over sterile planets, not through random brute force search of the ways to do it, but by actually being smart enough to show up and get it right the first time. And I don't think Llama 3.1 is probably there today, but you could imagine a level of effectiveness that might greatly reduce the compute requirements, right?

Luca Versari: (1:23:54)

Yeah. I think it makes sense to think that a variant of our experiments with self-replication can be used to find better ways to, let's say, evolve agents. This is part of what we want to explore, but of course, we are starting from literal strings of code and getting to something as complex as an LLM will take quite a while. And I think that we should take account for the risks at every level and increasingly so the more complex our systems become. But your point is very well taken that the bigger the model, the more costly this would be. So to have something like this work, we would need to have much more efficient models to start with.

Nathan Labenz: (1:24:35)

Okay. Cool. This is a fascinating discussion. I love the work. I think I should probably let you guys get back to it. Anything else you wanted to touch on that we didn't get to before we break?

Ettore Randazzo: (1:24:46)

I think we discussed pretty much all the aspects of the paper in quite a bit of detail.

Nathan Labenz: (1:24:52)

Yeah. Fascinating work, thought-provoking, maybe more thought-provoking for me than you intended it to be for the average reader, but that's the business that I'm in, is trying to go grab these random things and use them to at least stimulate some creative thoughts about where the future might be headed, and you've certainly helped me do that. So I really appreciate it. Appreciate the time today. Ettore Randazzo and Luca Versari from Google's Paradigms of Intelligence team, thank you both for being part of the Cognitive Revolution.

Ettore Randazzo: (1:25:22)

Thank you.

Luca Versari: (1:25:23)

Thank you very much for having us.

Nathan Labenz: (1:25:25)

It is both energizing and enlightening to hear why people listen and learn what they value about the show. So please don't hesitate to reach out via email at tcr@turpentine.co, or you can DM me on the social media platform of your choice.

 Published in:
 Episode

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
