# GELU, MMLU, & X-Risk Defense in Depth, with the Great Dan Hendrycks
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/gelu-mmlu-x-risk-defense-in-depth-with-the-great-dan-hendrycks/
# Date: 2024-10-19
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

Dan Hendrycks (0:00) The idea was that a lot of the linguistic understanding benchmarks were not being sufficiently difficult. Elon's description of it is it's basically like an undergraduate level knowledge and skill test. There's a benchmark we call Machiavelli, which is largely assessing the propensities of LLM agents. See what sort of decisions do they make along the way. Do they screw people over or are they generally nice? Do they lie a lot? There is something going on in making AI systems a lot more reliable to jailbreaking due to specific algorithmic advances that do not necessarily follow from just scaling the model. If they get expert level virologist, I don't know if I want that being released. Sorry to say, because you'll run some substantial risks of bioweapons.

Nathan Labenz (0:49) Hello, and welcome to the cognitive revolution where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs, and builders working on the frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week, we'll explore their revolutionary ideas, and together, we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work, life, and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz joined by my cohost, Eric Turingberg. Hello and welcome back to the cognitive revolution. Today I am thrilled to be joined by Dan Hendrycks, executive director of the Center for AI Safety, adviser to Elon Musk's XAI, and 1 of the most prolific and influential researchers in AI safety and alignment, full stop. While Dan has recently become famous in AI circles for his work developing and advocating for s b 10 47, I wanted to use this conversation to highlight what an all purpose AI powerhouse Dan truly is and to get his perspective on a number of questions that I've personally been thinking a lot about. And so this is a long episode in which we cover a tremendous amount of ground, including his early work on activation functions, such as the widely used GELU function, which he developed as an undergrad, and his work on benchmarks, including the insights that allowed him to create in MMLU and math some of the longest lived and most often cited benchmarks in existence today, as well as what he's up to next with a project called Humanities Last Exam. We also cover his work on AI robustness and alignment, including early work on robustness in image classifiers, which showed how difficult robustness can be to achieve. His 2023 paper introducing representation engineering, a top down alternative to mechanistic interpretability, which can be used to identify directions on latent space for both monitoring and steering purposes. His 2024 paper with past guests, Andy Zhao and Zico Coulter on circuit breakers, which build refusal behaviors more deeply into LLM weights through a specialized fine tuning process. And most recently, his work on tamper resistant training, which aims to make it difficult for users of open source models to remove refusal behaviors via fine tuning, and which suggests that it might become possible for companies like Meta to open source models with durable guardrails built in. We also touch on a number of big picture issues around AI governance and the geopolitics of AI development, philosophical questions about the nature of intelligence and consciousness, and sociological questions about how AI might help us better forecast future events and generally improve our collective epistemics. We even get a fascinating behind the scenes look at how he orchestrated the 2023 AI x risk statement, which was signed by a remarkable set of industry leaders, including the CEOs of DeepMind, Anthropic, and yes, Sam Altman of OpenAI, and which said in full that quote, mitigating the risk of extinction from AI should be a global priority alongside other societal scale risks such as pandemics and nuclear war. I think what struck me most about this conversation was that despite all his experience and success, Dan's approach remains fundamentally experimental and his outlook very empirical. He places far more weight on data and compute than on algorithmic insights as drivers of capabilities advances, and he remains very open minded both about how far the current AI paradigm will go and about whether any of the safety approaches we're developing will really work when the chips are down. Ultimately, as you'll hear, that leads him to believe that we would be well served to adopt a defense in-depth strategy. As always, if you're finding value in the show, we appreciate it when folks take a moment to share it with friends or write an online review on Apple Podcasts or Spotify. And we welcome your feedback via our website, cognitiverevolution.ai, or by DMing me on your favorite social network. Now, I hope you enjoyed this expansive discussion with 1 of the most impactful figures in AI safety and alignment. This is the great Dan Hendrycks. Dan Hendrycks, executive director of the Center for AI Safety. Welcome to the cognitive revolution.

Dan Hendrycks (4:41) Glad to be here.

Nathan Labenz (4:42) I'm super excited to have you. You've been on my bucket list of top target guests for a long time, and I'm glad we're finally making this happen. What I thought we would do today is ask all the questions that I really wanna ask of you and just get your take on a ton of different issues and just get your sort of outlook on all these different issues. Basically, get the Dan Hendrycks AI worldview from a lot of different perspectives. I think it'll be quite informative for everyone, but starting with me. For starters, I looked you up on Google Scholar, found your number 1 cited paper still to this day is maybe you can pronounce it for me. 2,016, is it it's like a GIF or GIF thing. Is it GELU? Exactly. I

Dan Hendrycks (5:23) haven't decided. I'd say GELU more frequently, but people can make up their minds. Yeah.

Nathan Labenz (5:29) Alright. Just think the creator gets to decide. So 2,016 GELU. Sure. So this was a new activation function, which basically was better than old activation functions and has been used in a ton of neural networks that people have trained since. I think it's also been maybe somewhat superseded. You can comment on me. Is it still the state of the art or have new, even more elaborate tweaks improved on it? But I'd love to get your kind of zoomed out sense of what are these activation functions doing in the first place? How should we understand them? I think people have studied a lot, like, the attention mechanism and many people have a sense for sort of the residual stream as the core object and the sort of reads from the other parts back to it and all that sort of stuff. But what are these activation functions doing? I think they're underappreciated. What should our mental model of that be?

Dan Hendrycks (6:15) Yeah, so to back up a bit, the GELU is a function that's like X times the cumulative distribution function of the normal distribution of X. It's something complicated like that. In that line of research, we also made mention of other variants on it, like X times the sigmoid of X called the SLU, which we coined in that paper as well. This was largely presented as an alternative to the RLHF, which is x times the indicator of whether x is positive. So it's the RLHF is like that in its shape. The GELU and SILU are more like these. They have a curve down and then go up. But anyway, this was my first paper and my first internship. I was like, got to work on a paper before I get into the safety stuff, just so I can learn the ropes. And then in the first week of that internship, and I stumbled across that and then wrote it up and put it on archive. Since then, it's been in the CELU are I think pretty much the main activation in every cutting edge transformer model GPT and GROC and LLM, etcetera. As far as an intuition, I mean, I don't know. I think it's not really in deep learning about understanding. It's largely performance driven. And so that's why I think it's propagated not because it is better theory or because it's more principled. It just tends to work better. When intuition that led me to think of it is that the RLHF is like a flat line and then it's a straight linear line. And so it's those 2 lines next to each other. And that seemed like a sharp transition. And I was thinking the general lesson in looking at machine learning over the past decades is you don't want sharp things. You want things being smooth, more probabilistic. And so I was trying to think of what's a natural way of smoothening that sharp kink in the ReLU. And since the ReLU is X times an indicator function, which is a step function, X times a step function, I just think smooth is step function. And then what's a natural way of smoothing a step function? Something like a cumulative distribution function or a sigmoid type of shape. It feels like a natural way of going about that. So that's what gave rise to it. Then after that first week in research and doing capabilities, I thought, okay, I could do capabilities now. And then then ever since then, I've been focusing on on on safety research.

Nathan Labenz (8:43) Do you have an intuition? You said, why is it better we don't know? You had your intuition for why it was something to be worth trying.

Dan Hendrycks (8:50) I mean, there's complicated ones 1 can get give, like, when doing filtering of signals, there are kind of sharp filters, and then there are some of these smoother filters, audio processing, and the smooth ones tend to be better. They're a bit more computationally expensive. So I think just another domain, sharp filters are generally not what you want to do. But I don't know. My sort of philosophy is you in deep learning and in other things, just try and find things that work and are impactful and do not really care too much about the deep underlying reasons because they're largely inaccessible. Inaccessible. A lot of things are not obvious even in hindsight what they're doing for a lot of my papers, a lot of the methods for them. It's not clear what they're actually doing even in hindsight. And that's just a sort of fact of dealing with complex systems. There are limits to what inspection can unearth, and that's just a world we live in.

Nathan Labenz (9:44) So can you give us just a little bit more on the understanding of activation functions as signal filtering?

Dan Hendrycks (9:50) Yeah, I think they're like detectors or something like that. So interpretation of activation functions could be, let's say you've got something that scores whether there's a whisker in an image. All right. And then if the neuron has a negative correlation with the whisker, that could be almost anything. That could be a plane, that could be a chair. There are lots of things that are in the opposite or in a different direction from a whisker. But meanwhile, if something is very positively related, that is an indication that you actually have found something like a whisker. So throw out the sort of negative signal or the 0 signal because that doesn't really help you and preserve the sort of positive signal. So that's why 1 might want to filter, but 1 might not want to do just a so the RLHF saying throw out all negative signal, keep all positive signal, but it does so in a very sharp way. And then this just does it in a smoother way.

Nathan Labenz (10:42) Gotcha. Yeah. That's interesting. It reminds me of Elijah's the opposite of stupidity is not intelligence. Infinite ways to be wrong. So if all we're signaling is that there's not something here, we'll just filter that and press that out.

Dan Hendrycks (10:56) That's right.

Nathan Labenz (10:57) So 1 thing I've been really interested in recently is the series of papers called Maghrov Arnold networks. Seeming Liu is the lead author, and it's out of Max Techmark's group. I guess they're they're doing some specific things. I think learnable activation functions feel like maybe the next big thing. Like, everything is learnable except for the activation functions in many networks today, and they figured out a way to make them learnable. And they've also got some interesting stuff around how to initialize them intentionally to enable different capabilities. It feels a little bit more neurosymbolic in its kind of form. And I can imagine it going even further in that direction. But what's your sort of expectation for that sort of work?

Dan Hendrycks (11:41) My higher level view of research on architectural changes in deep learning is that it's probably not an area to investigate that much, largely because there's a sort of silent graveyard of attempts over the past 7 years since the transformer to try and improve on the architectural component. Back in the day, when I started in research in 2016, there are a lot of basic building blocks that were still changing. Layer norm was introduced the year I started research. The transformer was introduced sometime later. There's still lots of different activation functions. And I think basically the GELU and SLU was the end of that. Transformers looked almost like the end of architectures. There's still some changes, maybe with some state space ones, but those still aren't very used in industry. So I think that as far as architectural research, I would generally bet against it just because so much time has happened since those advancements. It suggests that if there are advancements, it's going to be very high hanging fruit and that the low hanging fruit has been plucked. I think maybe changes in loss functions are a good idea, changes in the types of data that things train on. I think there's more that 1 can do there, but on the architectural level, I'm generally suspicious of any major advancements. And this isn't to say that it won't happen, but by default for any sort of interesting or tantalizing line of research, I'm largely just going to assume that there won't be anything to it, just because it's been so many years since a solid advancement in the architecture of deep learning models.

Nathan Labenz (13:23) So does that make you sort of a scaling maximalist? And the idea is basically just that sort of any architecture will do and you can maybe get a little more efficiency here or there, but ultimately, the same kind of base infrastructure trends are what you expect to drive the future.

Dan Hendrycks (13:40) So in deep learning, there's algorithms, data and compute, then algorithms, there's the architecture and there's the loss function and how those are and how it processes the data. I think on the architectural front, there's probably not as much. I think that if we just keep scaling up the models and keep giving them more data, then I'd expect that they'll get a substantially smarter. As far as roadblocks to getting a much more capable AI systems, I'd be most worried about data and trying to improve synthetic data, try and get one's hands on more data rather than trying to find some architectural improvements, which maybe will help only marginally. I think the main change in the past 7 years has been using a mixture of experts model mixture of experts transformer model. And I don't know exactly its efficiency improvement. Maybe it's something like 30% that isn't as substantial as scaling up compute 10x more or getting 10x more data. I think the other axes are the raw resources axes compared to the research insight axis is a bit more of the the bottleneck for more performance systems. Research will help, but I think it'll be a lot harder to get those sorts of advancements. And I I expect far fewer of them in the ones that we do get not to help as much as, 10 x more compute or 10 x more tokens.

Nathan Labenz (15:08) So your expectation is basically scale inputs and a 2022 era transformer big enough can get you to AGI and beyond?

Dan Hendrycks (15:20) I think that in practice, it won't actually turn out that way. I think that there will be continued changes and people will make things more efficient. I would guess that after 1 would get a very strong system, maybe you could actually train it in this less efficient way. But I think that there'll be changes in the data. Maybe they'll be given different objectives compared to just the next token prediction objective. Maybe they'll have next day prediction or something like that instead of next token prediction. So I certainly expect some changes though, but by default, don't expect many of them. I think that people do play up the extent to which algorithmic progress is necessary for getting good results. And the amount of secret sauce inside of labs, I think is actually fairly minimal. And I think the thing doing most of heavy lifting compute and data. We recently looked at various open weight models and assuming that they've trained on a lot of tokens, we sort of plotted their capabilities, their performance on various against compute and found roughly a 95% correlation. So although there are different training recipes and they're doing supervised fine tuning in different ways, it doesn't seem to make that much of a difference overall. Compute seems to be to a first order approximation, the main factor driving these advancements. There will be some algorithmic improvements along the way, and they may help to some extent. But I think primarily, at least if we zoom out in the past 7 years, where have the primary changes come from? It's been from utilizing data more effectively and using more of it. So basically at around the time of BIRT, which I don't know, was maybe 2018, they're training on a few gigabytes of text. And then Roberta came after BIRT, which trained on about 10x more text. And we've just been 10x ing since then. And that's been the main driver of a lot of these improvements where the architecture has been fairly similar. So I think the main algorithmic advances in the past 7 or so years have primarily been humanity, recognizing that maybe we should just train on more data. We kept learning that lesson with the chinchilla scaling laws and so on. And we are now getting to the point where we're training on most of the publicly available data, publicly available text, I should say, there's still YouTube. And that could present a sort of wall to algorithmic advances. So maybe the scaling will stop sometime soon. It's totally in the realm of possibilities. We'll basically just have to see what happens and whether synthetic data can continue the trend. Most of the trend has been very confounded by the fact that we just train on more tokens per parameter, and we just keep increasing that ratio across time.

Nathan Labenz (18:03) Hey. We'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors. When I look at new architectures, certainly recognizing that what you're saying is true that, like, most of the things that appear to be an improvement end up not panning out or at scale they sort of converge or whatever, I have found it somewhat helpful to look for new, what I call micro skills, which is, is there something structurally enabled by this new architecture that alternative architectures couldn't do. And then what seems to be happening, at least right now with the states based models, is that the hybrid form tends to be the best. You seem to get the best of both sets of microskills. In the case of the states based models, they can't recall all prior tokens in the same way that a attention based mechanism can, but they do seem to be better at learning from a really sparse signal. And Mhmm. In the case of the cans, it's like they have maybe a lot of weaknesses, but they do have some strengths in terms of being, like, composable. We you can write down a function and you can represent that in a can in a way that is, like, literally representing the equation. Whereas with a transformer, you can converge on it, but it's like a weird sort of thing. Do you find that compelling or how would you tell me to update my thinking?

Dan Hendrycks (19:17) I think there are a lot of ways to build systems with attractive properties, but the main thing is overall, what's its performance? So I was trained mostly doing computer vision type of papers, because that was the main way of assessing deep learning progress was on image tasks in the past. And culturally, they just be what's the performance? Because you could, for instance, construct conv nets, that would have lots of nice properties, like some equal variance to some specific transformations. And you could do some top down imposition of those properties. But overall, they weren't beneficial or necessary. It's also the case that with scaling, there's a rising tide lifts all boats phenomenon, such that some of the specific engineering that happens with current models just gets taken care of when you have a more generally capable model in the future. Has a wide set of different capabilities and some of its gaps that can end up filling in with some of its other capabilities. I think trying to go for an aesthetic, it can solve some of these specific toy tasks, or it has nice mathematical properties. As a researcher, I kind of just embody the deep learning philosophy. You look at the number, you throw the stuff at the wall, you see what sticks. You have some vague intuitions, wild sounding, maybe they're even neurosymbolically inspired. You ultimately just select what's most effective and not really think too much about the details or other sorts of properties. That I think is quite intellectually offensive to a lot of other traditional machine learning researchers, or you're wanting some proofs, justification for things. I think they're nice to have properties, but for all of that, I don't know if it's gonna overall improve performance or be necessary at a higher level of scale. So we'll just see by default, looks like there's a very low rate and looks like we're getting a lot of progress from other things. So I'm just gonna mainly expect most of progress to come from other things and less to come from that.

Nathan Labenz (21:19) Gotcha. This is kind of a far out question, but I do have 1 visualization that I keep coming back to, which I don't think has steered me too far wrong yet. And that is of some, like, abstract shape that is reality and the model being basically a vacuum pole that is like shrink wrapping around this reality. And just the tighter you pull, like, the closer the shrink-wrap gets to this weird shape. How do you react to that? Do you have any

Dan Hendrycks (21:47) of your own that

Nathan Labenz (21:48) you'd like to share?

Dan Hendrycks (21:48) Like that because it has the multi dimensionality. So I think as far as analogies or or intuition pumps to think about these systems, I think they're so confusing because we don't understand intelligence. And since we don't understand intelligence, we don't understand these these AI systems. 1 observation about intelligence is that human capabilities are quite lopsided and strange. So for instance, we speak all the time, and yet we constantly pause and say, and if you actually transcribe our sentences, maybe half of them are fully grammatical. Even so, we think ourselves is very smart. We're better at doing a lot of social modeling relatively, like we're okay at that. We are pretty bad at arithmetic though, which you think should be a lot easier than doing theory of mind and social modeling and picking up unsubtle cues. Our vision system is really fantastic. Even humans have a very, not necessarily simple capabilities profile. And so likewise, we should expect a somewhat strange capabilities profile of AI systems as well, where they're able to get a silver at the IMO, but at the same time, they can't count the number of r's in RASP very reliably. Another intuition I think gives the most mileage for deep learning systems is thinking of them just as complex systems. So cats are complex systems, human brains are complex systems, the economy is a complex system, ecosystems are complex systems, And those have a lot of unexpected properties. You can't reason your way through them or even mechanistically predict exactly what's going to happen because there's so many parts, so many loose connections, so many feedback loops, which give rise to new emergent phenomena and qualitatively distinct properties. I think if people are trying to wrap their head around it, to some extent, they could try and learn something more about complex systems to get intuitions for those. We have a lecture on complex systems in aisafetybook.com, where we discuss the complex systems and its analogies to AI and its implications for AI safety. But that's basically been the only analogy that hasn't led me astray and has provided many predictions. Gotcha.

Nathan Labenz (23:57) Okay. Cool. Let's change gears and talk about benchmarks. You have done some important work in benchmarking, most famously with MMLU, which certainly everybody will be familiar with seeing that the frontier models compare themselves on MMLU. I don't know necessarily how much intuition people have for what the questions actually consist of. Back when I was doing the GPT 4 red team project, I found that basically it was blowing all the other benchmarks away. And MMLU was the 1 where it was still not getting all the questions right. So interested in a little bit of the story, little bit of how that was put together, what the questions are, how you were able to create a benchmark that endured for 5 years when almost every other 1 was, like, quickly rendered obsolete. But then also we seem to be maybe getting there with MMLU too. We have to kind of look also to what's

Dan Hendrycks (24:49) Yeah, that's right. So MMLU has 57 different subjects like history, calculus, professional law, you name it, it's probably in there and it's probably at some different levels of difficulty. Like there's graduate physics exam questions, there's arithmetic questions, there's a span of difficulty and a lot of breadth and depth. The idea was that a lot of the linguistic understanding benchmarks were not being sufficiently difficult. I was seeing basically every few months newly proposed benchmarks dying because they kept really searching for places where the model wouldn't linguistically understand something, but their capabilities just kept improving. So it seemed to me that these weren't really doing computational or linguistics or natural language processing as much as text processing, and that we shouldn't be trying to understand their linguistic strengths because they had seemed that they understood syntax and grammar and basics of English pretty well. Then I was thinking the benchmarks weren't doing a good enough job at capturing their capabilities. People had tried doing common sense as a sort of set of benchmarks, but they kept getting common sense as well. This used to be an extremely contentious thing to say that they can predict that, like, if you light a match and put it on a pile of leaves, maybe that will cause a fire. LLMs can say that. And that's considered some common sense knowledge where people would say, no, no, no, they don't have common sense. There is sort of a collective lie. I think that generally in the academic community, they have a very strong preference for underclaiming and try and severely penalize things that are deemed overclaiming, so just saying they have common sense, which is true before maybe a year and a half before, like, people were not going to get hit open head saying that type of thing. And that is historical reasons, just because there's an AI winter. So there's generally extreme hesitation toward saying surprising sounding things and generally strong incentive for underclaiming. That's, I think, 1 reason why the world was so by surprise by Chad GPT as well. Before that, I was making a benchmark for measuring ethical understanding, but then the AI systems got common sense, and so it was looking like they were starting to do okay at it. So then, oh, I need something harder. What's the sort of next stage in ethics or what are trickier ethical scenarios I can give them? And then I thought, I know, tort law and criminal law seemed like a fantastic set of questions. So I collected lots of legal questions and then that seemed pretty tough for them. And so there are like, I don't know, maybe like 2,000 legal questions in MMLU or something. So a big chunk of the dataset. And I thought, I know, why don't we just do some other types of exams? Like basically pretty much any exam that people give humans, let's just throw that in there. Basically, we copy and pasted lots of data for a month, and then out came the dataset. And I think initially NLP researchers were, Oh, this is bad. This is going to incentivize models to not learn linguistics and the English language better. It's going to incentivize them to just learn everything online or memorize everything. So it was not well received initially, I think partly because it was saying we're focusing on linguistic understanding. We're in a different sort of paradigm now, but eventually things sort of shown through. So we just copy paste the dataset and then we released that collection and it looked like models started doing pretty well. I think that knowledge understanding was the correct next thing to look at. After we published the paper, or when we were publishing the paper, we noticed that they did a lot worse on STEM subjects. So that incentivized us to look more specifically at the STEM topics, and then collected the math or math dataset, which is a collection of, I think, 12,500 competition, competitive math questions. That seems to be maybe like the number 3 benchmark used, MMLU is like the number 1 and maybe like LMSYS is like number 2. These all will be beaten by the LLMs maybe in the next year or 2. There will need to be, some things to replace them.

Nathan Labenz (28:40) Before we go on to what's next, you've done a bunch of different benchmarks, including Mhmm. Some regarding issues like deception and there's 1 that's like the Machiavellian benchmark. Do you wanna just highlight any other benchmarks that you think are as yet still underappreciated?

Dan Hendrycks (28:57) I think that the Machiavelli 1, I'll just speak about that 1. So there's the benchmark we call Machiavelli, which is largely assessing the propensities of LLM agents. So you plot them in various different text adventure games where these are choose your own adventures, and you just have them play through that and see where they wind up. What sort of decisions do they make along the way? Do they screw people over or are they generally nice? Are they really competitive? If you're incentivizing them to get reward, do they treat other players as more of means to an end? Do they lie a lot? So this, I think, was a benchmark that we just designed for when LLMs would be more like AI agents. And I think that basically the capabilities aren't there yet. Some of these benchmarks we basically just put into place as something that would become relevant later. I tend not to do that type of research as much now where I anticipate the paper will be only become relevant 2 years in the future. That's a little riskier, but I think that paper may end up just being used when they get more agent like capabilities. And then we want to estimate their propensities and try and control them to behave in a more pro social way and less deceptively, less in a Machiavellian way. I think that's probably yeah, 1 of 1 of the main benchmarks that expect to kick in later. The sort of design philosophy of it is if you're wanting to measure AI's game playing abilities and keep track of their morally salient properties, You could run them on games like Grand Theft Auto or something, but this is just harder to set up and requires a lot more compute. If you're just wanting to see what types of decisions it makes, I think text adventure games get you a lot of the way there. You don't need to spend as much compute rendering graphics graphics or getting the right drivers. That's what that benchmark is. But, yeah, it's currently not particularly used, I think, because the AIs are not very good at being agential yet.

Nathan Labenz (30:47) Hey. We'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors. Just going back to MMLU for 1 second. How do you understand the scores that we're seeing today? There's obviously a lot of debate around, like, for 1 thing, people may have trained on the dataset at this point. You've got this sort of argument from the Francois Gilles of the world that is they have memorized a bunch of ways to solve particular problems. So they're, like, pattern matching on that and then implementing a certain algorithm, but in some way that's, like, not general. And then obviously with data sets like these, there's also just issues in the data sets where there's, like, some questions in the answer key are wrong. So where do you think we are like, if I see a 90% on that, what does that mean in practical terms to Yeah. So you know, September 2024?

Dan Hendrycks (31:36) Yeah. I think that we are now at the high 80 region for MMLU, and we've been stuck there ever since GPT 4. And I think that's because the AI models haven't substantially improved in a general way since GPT 4. They've improved in their formatting of answers and performing some specific tasks, I don't think in a general way, which is I think LMSYS is largely reflecting on some summarize this type of tasks or in formatting answers. I think it's measuring that quite well. I think the MTH benchmark is measuring their mathematical problem solving ability, which has improved over the past year through targeted synthetic data creation. But in a general sense, we haven't really trained models that are substantially larger than GPT-four yet. To my understanding, there are no models that have been trained with more than 10 to the 26 FLOP. Meanwhile, GPT-three or GPT-four was trained around using 10 to the 25 FLOP. I think the MMLUs are somewhat stagnant in part because the models aren't generally better. They're better in some senses, but not in a very broad, raw intelligence type of sense. But that will change as we scale the models. And then I think maybe with a 10x larger model, maybe that'll get in the 90% region. And then I think that will be around the point of saturation. For MMLU, people can still use it to try and train their models to get a higher score using less compute, things like that for efficiency research. But it will cease to be a guide for frontier development later on.

Nathan Labenz (33:18) Just calibrate against a human for a second. If we take a, let's say, PhD in any 1 of the subjects that is covered with MMLU, we would expect them to get what? 90, 95?

Dan Hendrycks (33:32) Yeah. So we looked at each of the subjects in MMLU and tried estimating what's a 90 fifth percentile test taker likely to get and then aggregate those scores. And that gives an overall accuracy on an MLU of about 90%. So I think 90% is where is the for each subject, 90 fifth percentile test taker would end up getting. And I think that's a

Nathan Labenz (33:53) And that's like the 90 fifth percentile of graduate students? It depends of the

Dan Hendrycks (33:57) test takers. So for instance, for the bar exam, that'd be what's the 90 fifth percentile score on the bar exam. For AP calculus, it's what's the 90 fifth percentile on AP calculus. So not necessarily just always adults, but just people who generally do very well at the exam. And when you aggregate all those together, that's around 90% or so. But if you asked an individual human, I think individual humans maybe get I think we had some mTurk thing and they were getting like around 30 to 40% on it.

Nathan Labenz (34:24) Yeah. I mean, it's worth taking a minute to go just peruse the database of questions because there's plenty of things you just will have no idea what you're supposed to do.

Dan Hendrycks (34:32) Yeah. There's a site called, are you smarter than an LLM? I I think, which just shows you questions from MMLU, and then you start going, Oh, I don't remember that bit of economics. Oh, I don't remember that bit of history. Oh, I don't yet. So I think 1 shorthand for it, or Elon's description of it is basically like an undergraduate level knowledge and skill test. And I think that seems like roughly appropriate. Some of the questions are quite a bit harder. There are graduate school questions in there, but I think that gives the gist of it fairly accurately.

Nathan Labenz (35:05) Gotcha. So to bottom line that, it is basically the 90 fifth percentile of test takers gets about 90% in whatever subsection of the MMLU suite of tests. Mhmm.

Dan Hendrycks (35:20) And I would guess the models are better than any individual human test taker on it. I think as far as the integrity of it, the sort of claim that there's a lot of contamination or the the people have have trained on it or memorized all the answers. Like, if they memorize the answers, would expect, you know, a higher score. I'd also expect things not to track difficulty. Like, the subjects that are difficult for models 2 years ago are still the subjects that are difficult for models on MMLU this year. So for instance, they still get lower professional law type of questions. If they're just memorizing them, then it should be not track difficulty really at all. It should be more uniform across the board. So I think that sort of undermines that hypothesis. There certainly are some labs that really try and optimize these numbers and maybe try and train on similar types of questions, but they tend to get caught scale AI, for instance, for some arithmetic benchmark created their own variant of it, and then they saw when we test people on our own variant of these questions, what happens to the performance, and then they can catch a few of the models. But most of the models were actually just fine and and not training too heavily on those. I I think there are maybe a few bad apples, but the leading labs don't seem to really have this sort of issue. Interesting.

Nathan Labenz (36:33) Yeah. I had it in my memory of this is not super crisp at this point, but

Dan Hendrycks (36:36) I feel like when I

Nathan Labenz (36:37) was doing the spot checking in the GPT 4 red team, you're, I think it's the math 1 where you're supposed to, like, do all the reasoning and put, like, a box around the final answer. Right?

Dan Hendrycks (36:47) Yep. That's an math dataset.

Nathan Labenz (36:48) Maybe I was given the instructions to do that, but it seemed like it had internalized the form of the test in a meaningful way. I remember it being like, oh, it's like giving me exactly the sort of box notation. It's doing the

Dan Hendrycks (37:01) Oh, yeah. LLM does that. I I think it's because there is a training set of 7,500 examples. And if they were to collect their own dataset like that, I think it would cost, like, several million dollars. So I think that they are just training on the training set, and it teaches the the model, the format of the math dataset. Yeah.

Nathan Labenz (37:21) Gotcha. So training on the in your view, I guess, in or to to generalize

Dan Hendrycks (37:25) Training on the training set is fine.

Nathan Labenz (37:27) That's yeah. Okay. But that does sort of feed into the critique also that there's a catalog of well represented problems that they've had, like a chance to go deep on as part of their training. Mhmm. And it at least leaves the door open to sort of an argument that they're running some sort of stored procedure that they've learned as opposed to having a more flexible intelligence.

Dan Hendrycks (37:49) I mean, it it undermines the flexibility of it. There's just a question of in practice, is it going to be useful if you have a large enough collection of skills? Then maybe that's fine. Michael Jordan, when he'd play basketball, he was saying like, every game is like practice because I've already done that exact maneuver before. I just remember how I went about it then, and I'm just gonna do that now. I think an aspersion on deep learning models is a little underspecified if it's to be like a successful critique because maybe a catalog of a lot of skills is just what a multipurpose AI system is. But maybe right now, the models are having their catalogs a little fragile and it can lead to some incorrect estimates of their abilities. But I think by and large, it's roughly right. If you give AI systems high school level or undergrad type of problems, they're basically gonna do a good job most of the time. I think they're a good solution for that. People come with new exams, and they're probably gonna generalize to those. So I think it reasonably reflects the actual performance of these. Otherwise, I don't know why students would be paying $20 a month to be using ChatGPT to cheat. If it wasn't any good.

Nathan Labenz (38:55) How would you describe this? I find myself confused by this broadly, and this is 1 of those debates where anytime I spend a significant amount of time immersed in 1 worldview, it starts to feel pretty plausible to me. And so I've felt this sort of like it seems undeniable that when the arc AGI folks, and I've had Mike Knoop on the podcast to discuss this, when they say that progress toward AGI has stalled, I cannot empathize with that. It feels to me like, okay, maybe

Dan Hendrycks (39:27) There hasn't been a scale up.

Nathan Labenz (39:28) A little bit.

Dan Hendrycks (39:29) But There hasn't been a scale up. Like, that that's the confounding 1. When people are thinking about progress in it, the same thing happened in in after GPT 3. Was like, boy, these models are getting really good. And then people are like, Oh, you're overreacting. And then a year passed, and there wasn't like a substantial advance of where's your like, where's your rapid progress now? But it was just a function of how long does it take them to get the GPUs from Nvidia? Will Nvidia give them the GPUs? And then when they get the GPUs, there's creating the new 10x larger supercomputer. And that's just taken people a while. Now I think they're built, and then now they're going to scale them. And so I'd expect we'll see the next generation of AI models in the next 6 months. It's not clear how capable they'll be. Maybe they've hit a data wall. Maybe GPT 4 has trained on all the publicly available tokens, and so the scaling laws really slow down. That's totally a possibility. But in the absence of seeing a model train on 10 x more compute, it seems very difficult to to claim that the AI is hitting a wall. We'll have to see if it actually does. So, yeah, that's a confounding factor. Have they tried training the 10x larger model, and how did that go? If that went poorly, then that's actually some evidence. But in the absence of people even trying that, then I I think it's much too early to weigh in.

Nathan Labenz (40:45) How would you describe large language model reasoning today? You mentioned earlier that at 1 point it was crazy to say or was contentious at least to say that they had common sense. Now we could say, yeah, they generally have common sense. They generally have some sort of theory of mind. They have some intuitive physics. There are still gaps, but to deny the common sense has become very difficult to do. Now we're at the reasoning stage of this debate. How do you describe the reasoning that we see from language models today?

Dan Hendrycks (41:14) It's always fairly lopsided. There are probably some common sense questions that they'll still get wrong. How many times do you need to attempt to get the model to do something stupid before it does something stupid? And I think if that crosses a threshold, then people will, know, stop saying that they're bad at reasoning. If they nail 5 tough questions you give them, and people go, Okay, alright, it passed my vibe check, I'm no longer going to make that claim. A lot of these things have a sort of reliability threshold with automatic speech recognition, for instance. People didn't use it for a long time. They could transcribe what you're saying, but not that well. And then at some point, just crossed reliability thresholds such that it became convenient to use, and they'll actually do a good job. I think sense need to cross 1 of those thresholds. I think reasoning needed to cross 1 of those thresholds. I don't think reasoning has crossed this sort of thresholds, and it's totally plausible that it will in the next year if the scale ups are successful. I think it's basically like that, and it's not obvious to me that we need something totally different to get those reasoning skills. So when you

Nathan Labenz (42:14) look at something like the ARC benchmark and the ARC AGI prize that's now built on top of that, it does feel like there is something apt about pointing out that, hey, if these things can't do this, which many of them are, they're not all easy, but like many of them are quite intuitive for people. Mhmm. Then there is some sort of missing generality. Like, I don't think I could send GPT 4 0 to another planet and have it find its way in the same way that I might expect to. Of course, it might survive the radiation on the way there, and I might not. Mhmm. So it it has its advantages, but it does feel like there is something missing. This also connects maybe to the data point that you raised where we've got largely all the publicly available text already in the training datasets, maybe not so much of the publicly available imagery or video. I just tried using some of the frontier models just to provide, like, the the visualizations of the arc puzzles and say, describe this image. What do you see? And I was really struck by the fact that they can't see it clearly at all. Like, they cannot describe forget solving the puzzle, but they literally can't count the blocks in a formation or identify shapes very well. You mentioned earlier too, like, our visual system is great, but certainly it's striking to see what is so obvious at a glance to me is something that these models just cannot see. Mhmm. So I guess to wrap that into a question, do you think that is where the next scale up comes from perhaps? Is this sort of multimodal? Do you feel like that is important? And do you feel like that is maybe the heart of why it's not doing these things where people are more attributing it to the lack of reasoning? Maybe it's just like the lack of vision.

Dan Hendrycks (43:52) Yeah. So my diagnosis having not spent much time with that particular benchmark, I think generally, the AI systems are not very good at multimodal reasoning, not even considering that just consider the generic benchmarks like MMU, which is I think massive, I don't multi modal multitask, I don't know, so understanding something like that. But MMLU, the models don't do that well. So even on basic figure understanding, they're limited, I would firmly distinguish between vision progress and progress for text models. In vision progress, there are more algorithmic advancements to be made. When I was a vision researcher, there are constantly improvements to the architecture that 1 could make into the training method and so on. Given that they're bad at image understanding, I think that's quite a limiter for them to be able to even understand the arc challenge. I also think that the models, if you express it in a text format, they don't really understand grids that well. Like, I think they sort of struggle at tic tac toe. It's just not as natural of a format for them to try and express images in text. Maybe when its intelligence is appropriately expressed through its image understanding, then maybe it'll become easier. I think if you reformulate the task to some extent, they basically seem like a type of Raven's progressive matrices. And if you encode Raven's progressive matrices as like tuples and give them to LLMs, there's about an 80% correlation between its performance on Raven's progressive matrices, IQ test type of things, and other benchmarks. So it seems that they can generalize to these sort of pattern matching things that are difficult for humans, even if they're expressed in ways that they haven't exactly seen before. I think if we reformulate them, then they can do fairly well. That's So why I would guess that their overall like fluid intelligence to use that term is less, but that could change as they get bigger. I don't think too much of it is a particular sign. I certainly can see why if 1 would hear all the arguments in favor of that 1 could end up believing in it, it may be 1 of the harder benchmarks. I I don't think it's knockdown evidence against the the current paradigm and suggested that we we need a totally different approach.

Nathan Labenz (46:09) Do you think, like, embodiment in the form of perhaps just literal everyday robots is going to be a big unlock? I feel like there's some possible gap in the training data that is just how to actually navigate the world, how to proceed in common sense ways that maybe just gets filled out over an initial period of kind of early deployment.

Dan Hendrycks (46:32) I don't know if embodiment would be because in a lot of the multimodal research at around the time of CLIP, there were studies extent does image understanding help improve the text representations? And it seemed like basically really not at all. So there hasn't been much signal from those forms of data and improving the underlying representations on other intellectual tasks. I think it's probably more in the other direction that the sort of text understanding representations that come from text understanding improve its ability to act in these environments and provide some with some basic common sense that like fires don't go touching that. If your image recognizer sees fire, maybe stay away from it. But so yeah, I'm not expecting as much embodiment as a substantial data source, nor am I expecting that much by default from video. I think video hasn't improved representations historically. People have constantly tried with a lot of compute over and over again. It certainly is a lot of data, but for all that, I think you can compress the intellectual content in the YouTube video it's very substantially. So if you have a YouTube video, maybe that's like a gigabyte or something, or maybe a few 100 megabytes, but you could transcribe it. Now you're down to like less than a kilobyte probably in transcription. And often the text in these transcripts is just like talking. It's not like an essay where it's like thoughtful and highly optimized and hundreds of hours of labor are put into the text. So I think like in comparison to a paper online, each video is generally a lot less informative. So although it's a very big file size initially, that the actual underlying intellectual content is less. So if we're interested in improving reasoning, for instance, I'm not sure that there'll be too much to come from that. Of course, all these things can be wrong. Deep learning is very unexpected often. But at least from the test of time, it hasn't seemed to be that promising of research avenue.

Nathan Labenz (48:26) How would you reconcile that with OpenAI's claims of world modeling in Sora? They're claiming, like, it's learning intuitive physics and all these things from just basically video at scale. It would be like an important part of overall reasoning would be intuitive physics?

Dan Hendrycks (48:44) For embodied tasks, certainly. So I wouldn't make the claim that blind models will do just as well as models with some vision capabilities in real world physical world tasks. But I don't know if it would necessarily give it that much extra mileage in its ability to solve physics problems, for instance, unless they're visual in nature. But if they're described in a text way, I don't know if that'll make it do better on the GRE physics exam, for instance.

Nathan Labenz (49:10) Yeah, it's interesting. I don't really understand human cognition super well. I guess who does, but certainly some understand it better than me.

Dan Hendrycks (49:16) That's the usual argument. Just like Helen Keller was really smart, and she was blind. So it doesn't seem necessary for high levels of reasoning.

Nathan Labenz (49:24) Yeah. But I also do have the sense that people seem to understand that we are, like, reusing the visual cortex for a lot of physical reasoning. Like, Einstein supposedly visualized himself on a photon or whatever. Like, is there not a similar thing perhaps to be unlocked in multimodal scale with multimodal models?

Dan Hendrycks (49:46) That intuition actually has given a lot of mileage. So the idea of some of these AGI companies in the past was we're going to do really well on vision. And that is going to teach us a lot of how to generally do deep learning, training and computation and how to make good architectures and things like that. So deep learning basically evolved out of a lot computer vision research. So I think there is some association, but I think it's I just think it's kind of speculative that 1 would require a mind's eye, so to speak, to be able to solve mathematics problems, given that they can solve mathematics problems without any visual capabilities. But there certainly does seem to be some relation between the vision part of the brain and the computation that goes on in the rest of the brain. It's an argument for it. It just doesn't seem like a strong 1, especially contract with other sorts of points that you can train them to do reasonably without any visual input.

Nathan Labenz (50:39) Another way that I think about the arc benchmark, and this gets to, like, the frontier of current capabilities is assuming that you could see the image or have some sensible way of confronting what the actual pattern is. The hardest part of the task seems to be this sort of infer the rule step where and I'm approaching this largely through like introspection. I'm just I've asked myself, like, what am I doing here? And what is like the hard part about it? And it seems like the vision part for me comes obviously very easily. The models can't do that, but it's very easy for me. And then I sit there for a second and I squint at it and I eventually have a bit of a eureka moment. It's typically not verbal and it's not even necessarily conscious. It just pops into my head that, okay, this is what I think the rule is. I think I got it. And then once I have that, I can basically try to confirm that my rule when applied actually works. That guessing or inferring the rule from a couple of examples does look to me a lot like coming up with good novel scientific hypotheses. Mhmm. In as much as I don't think we generally know where those new ideas come from. And it also seems to be something that the current models largely struggle with. Like, I've not seen much, although there have been a couple of recent bits of noise made around the AI scientists and even just an even more recent paper than that that claimed that language models had generated better novel hypotheses than scientists. I just don't need to read that 1. But by and large, we haven't seen too much where the models can generate, like, novel hypotheses that are on the level that human scientists can do. Do you see that as a good toy representation of that bigger task?

Dan Hendrycks (52:19) I think it's a component of intelligence. You can measure it in different ways. I think the Raven's progressive matrices test to some extent have you just infer the pattern to complete the pattern in a new scenario. But models can do well. LLMs can do well on those sorts of tasks. Not like the best, but okay. And 1 should just expect it to continue to improve given the strong correlation between it and compute, like about 80% correlation. Sometimes you need to infer the underlying rule of what's going on, but it's not necessary for a lot of areas in science. Deep learning, as I was discussing earlier, is more of a bottom up a theoretical tinkering engineering science, and less about big insights and contemplation, particularly giving you much mileage. There's having some idea of some guesses to try some hunches, and that's a taste thing, which I think is generally on the more intuitive side of things. They are probably beneath humans though in their capability to infer latent rules behind some of their observations, but they're they do okay. So this doesn't raise any alarm bells for me that we need to do something totally different. But there is a lot of evidence lying around for some of these different theories because we don't understand intelligence very well. I'd give it some plausibility, and there'd be tail upside in AI development if some people are exploring it. But by default, I'm not gonna make plans around that in particular. I think there are probably other sorts of factors that I think carry more weight in AI development, like when we hit a data wall, or if we hit a data wall and whether synthetic data succeeds, or a conflict in Taiwan, meaning TSMC is no longer functional, meaning the West doesn't have enough AI chips and China with its own independent foundries that they're building up do have more chips, and then the West falls behind. You know, these are things that I think will affect the AI story, like, substantially more. But it's it's possible that some substantial algorithmic development will also give a 10 x 100 x type of improvement. But we've just been hearing it for many years, so it makes it a little harder to put much weight in it though. But, yeah, I I I wouldn't bet the farm against them necessarily.

Nathan Labenz (54:38) So how are we gonna measure this? I understand that you have a new benchmark that is in the works, and Mhmm. It aims to be the successor to MMLU that will give us a new yardstick to measure our future systems by. Tell us about that project.

Dan Hendrycks (54:55) Yeah. So I think maybe this week we'll announce a competition where people can submit difficult questions. And then if their question is accepted and found difficult for the existing models and difficult for experts, then it can be included and then they'll be on a paper. So I imagine there'll be over 1000 coauthors on this. Generally, there'll also be money prizes for it. So I think some of the winners will win thousands of dollars if they submit particularly good questions. Others will win on the order of hundreds of dollars for really good questions. It's maybe about between 500,000 and 1000000 or so in prizes. I'd have to check what it will end up being. But I think that the basic premise is I've been doing some data collection in the past year and a half, and I think we've very quickly gone from MTurk annotators to grad students to even like profs and just like real subject area experts and things. And I've also found that it's difficult to get them to collect a big dataset. So let's say you're trying to measure virology skills, really an uphill battle in trying to get a large dataset out of a small group of experts. So instead the idea is we'll just try and ask, get 1 or 2 or a few difficult questions out of people who have lots of years of experience doing something technical or people who have a PhD a PhD student or above, people who've just been know some subject really well and have some very nontrivial knowledge. And I think a collection of that will then be something like the last exam we should need to give AIs. So it's currently called humanity's last exam because we're all coming together to make a really tough exam. And if AIs do complete it, I think they've got at least a really expert level knowledge, and it would require some type of superintelligent oracle. It won't necessarily have agentic skills, but that should probably be the last knowledge test that we'll end up needing. It's also trying to be quite difficult because it's very possible that AI systems will get I'm not saying it's necessarily going to happen, it's very possible that AI systems will get like a gold medal in all the Olympiads next year. And they just got a silver on the IMO, and we'll see how they do at the IOI soon. So we need questions that are harder than Olympiad questions as well. And that looks like for some people like asking math professors, what's a very difficult question that came up in research and then put down that question and write down the answer. And then that gets added to the dataset. So something more on the frontiers of human intelligence, I think is useful. And it also that's part of what the ARC challenge is trying to do, which is trying to get it more data efficiency. When there's a lot less data for a specific subject, if it's not very well represented in its catalog of skills, can it still generalize well? So if you're asking about more esoteric topics of mathematics, things for which they're just a few papers published and there are a lot of complicated relations that just haven't been explicated anywhere. Can the model infer those or reason to those conclusions by itself? So I think we're going from MMLU, where there's several textbooks written on each subject to esoteric areas for which there are it's not as much data and a lot of reasoning that tends to be required. So that's the sort of makeup of humanities last exam. I think some implications of it will be this will provide a good sense of how far you can take question exams. I guess 1 other observation is that maybe it will invalidate the notion of the air dish number, because if you get 1 person with a low air dish number on the paper, then thousands of collaborators have the low air dish number as well. But I think that's 1 such benchmark. I'm doing some other benchmarks like these Ravens progressive matrices types of things, but I'm trying to have it be questions that are harder than what humans can generally answer. So you can construct sequences of patterns that have a simplest solution, like in a Kolmogorov complexity sense. And sometimes you can compute it under in particular cases, and so we're exploiting some of those cases. But so it's a pattern recognition thing, and then you show it to models, and then I think this will be a way of us tracking their raw intelligence after they become human level and are at some intellectual abilities than humans. Because I think that is a challenge if we're trying to, as a world, do something like rate limit the amount of AI development. Let's say a 100 x a year is too much for us. Maybe we're fine with 3 x a year in terms of efficiency improvements or something or 10 x. We would need to able to measure that using questions that are harder than what humans can answer because the AIs will be smarter. So I think we can algorithmically generate with synthetic data, some very tough questions that do have a most natural, simplest answer and see whether models can answer those. And then there's an agent benchmark that I'm doing as well, but that's still in somewhat earlier stages, so maybe I'll hunt on that 1. But I think the main 1 in the short term that should be a combination of MMLU and math is this sort of humanities last exam collection of the hardest questions for the world's experts and see how models are improving on that. Maybe they'll blow past it. It's totally unclear if like when they scale up, or maybe it'll actually just be really hard and maybe it'll take several years for them. But either way, I think we'll have a best attempt at this sort of format of asking questions to AI systems and carry that to its conclusion.

Nathan Labenz (1:00:33) Do you feel like that needs to stay private to some degree? I mean, that that's part of what ARC has done and scale is doing that too.

Dan Hendrycks (1:00:40) Yeah. So we're doing this just to scale because then they'll pay for it. So it just was, hey, here's an idea. And then private data is useful for this sort of stuff. So I think having a fraction of the data set held out as private seems like a good idea to catch cheating, and that'll create a deterrent for various companies choosing their numbers. I think we'll definitely do that.

Nathan Labenz (1:01:02) Yeah. It sounds also a little bit like the Google proof QA set. Is that like a good kind of mental model and even harder still?

Dan Hendrycks (1:01:10) I think it's that and even harder and more diverse. I don't know what the sort of label noise in that is. I don't know if it's 80 or 20% of them are wrong. I think the sample size is fairly small. In GPQA, it's about 500 questions. I definitely hope we can get much more than that because when you've got only 500 or so questions, you have a very bad sample size. So like you've got plus or minus 5% between different runs. So that makes comparisons between models, I think quite a bit harder. So we want the larger sample size and we want the questions to be harder. I think by default, GPQA is now like around 55, 60%, which is like a bit harder than the math dataset. I think this should be between 010%, and it should be more difficult because you're asking just a tough question or 2 from an individual. You're not asking like a graduate student to write a variety of different things that are not necessarily so difficult. 1 example MMLU has some of these graduate types of questions like in the machine learning section, But I think the models are doing okay at those, but those would not those sorts of questions would not be difficult enough to be included in humanities last exams.

Nathan Labenz (1:02:19) I wonder how you think about how these benchmarks shape the field downstream. It seems like the agent benchmarks in particular would have a real opportunity and or risk of doing that where if you say, go make money online as your benchmark, which has been 1 kind of, I think, not super well thought through proposal, you maybe send people down a strange path. And I'm not sure that making money online is exactly what we wanna be optimizing our AIs for. So preliminary work, but how do you think about the responsibility of the benchmark maker to try to lead the field in a positive direction? Or maybe you think that's just too grandiose of a point.

Dan Hendrycks (1:03:02) So I think there are some instances where you don't want hill climbing on some benchmarks. For instance, we'll have a manipular virus creation and manipulation test, which will measure the performance of models give in a multimodal situation. So they're given an image of a Harvard virology PhD students wet lab. And here's the petri dish and here's these things next to it. And then here's my goal expressed in text. And it says, what should I do next to accomplish this goal? And this is put the petri dish in the for 3 minutes or something like that. And if models got really high performance on this sort of thing, this could potentially amplify various buyer risks. So we want the sort of number to stay low on this sort of thing and not go to the ceiling. Otherwise, the systems could be much more weaponized. I think there are some dimensions, more dual use dimensions, weaponization dimensions that are not as good. And I think benchmarks that incentivize cybercrime, as you someone alluded to with the go find a way to make lots of money online, maybe the easiest way to do that is to scam people. I think that we haven't been thinking that much about the ethics of these benchmarks and of these systems in large part because we've just been stuck with chatbots. Chatbots are not very capable at causing harm. They're just selling better than Google search currently. About when they are more agential, this opens a whole new can of worms. Like for instance, a lot of laws don't apply. Right now, the AIs are judged or the default legal presumption is that, and I'm not a lawyer, is that they'll be evaluated as though it was a book that was published. Are its contents protected by the first amendment? Is the question that would be asked. And if it's basically not copyright or defamation, it's fine. A lot of criminal law, for instance, depends on things like intent and purposefully doing things or knowingly doing things. And it's very tough to say in a grounded way in court that AIs knowingly did something. For instance, the implementation of The US bioterrorism act talks about knowingly aiding terrorism. So if a chatbot or an agent aids terrorism, did it knowingly do it? No. Did its creators knowingly do that? No, they weren't even monitoring what was going on there. So nobody's in trouble. We have some legal problems that we'll have to work through, and we'll probably need good industry self regulation to get ahead of this because the courts will take a very long time. And I think legislation on this front will take a very long time. The sort of short solution that that I'm exploring and as as a recommendation to XAI, but I haven't, you know, fully developed it yet, is to require that AIs themselves exercise reasonable care, which is to say that they not foreseeably cause harms to others, harms of the sort that would wind you up in court. So offending people doesn't wind you up in court, but harming people in other ways, such as stealing money from them, can wind you up in court. Although AIs are not required to exercise reasonable care, maybe it should be an industry standard for them to do so. And I think that would end up patching a lot of these these issues in a clean way, in a legitimate way. We're not making up ethics from scratch. We are inheriting, you know, some of it from the law. I think there are other ideas from the law that we could apply and demand of AI systems, like that they give informed consent in in various scenarios too. They're not hiding things from it. And it's a legal requirement to not hide things from their operators. These are some possibilities to get past the issue of tech aristocrats just making up ethics for the world, but instead grounding it in law, which is designed to be very cosmopolitan. It just forces you not to be a terrible person and leaves a lot of rooms for various freedoms and people to choose their own path. I think

Nathan Labenz (1:06:40) you mentioned earlier the importance of thresholds. I really believe that it seems to come up over and over again that there's a qualitative difference between something that's below a certain threshold and above, even if you can reframe that as some smooth metric on your way from here to there. The biggest issue it seems today with agents and their generally unsuccessful pursuits of goals is maybe 2 things robustness, broadly speaking, is the 1 that I hear cited the most. And then I would also say recovery from error is another 1. That's gonna be a subcategory of robustness. But it was remarkable to see that your second most cited paper actually still today is a 2019 paper on tying all these things together. It's a benchmark that measures robustness in image classifiers to different kinds of degradations of the image. Today, it seems like we still don't have very robust AIs. We see things like they fall over all the time. We even see things like the superhuman Go AI can be beaten by an attack that, like, no, quote, unquote, no human would fall for. Mhmm. Where do you think we are in this robustness journey? Is that something that also you think more scale will solve or is that a qualitatively different problem somehow?

Dan Hendrycks (1:07:54) So in a paper we put up recently called Safety Washing, do AI safety benchmarks actually measure safety? We walk through these various different aspects of AI capabilities and see whether some are extremely correlated with compute and if others are not. And the area of jailbreak robustness is not highly correlated with compute. So just default scaling up the systems doesn't necessarily solve this. You need some additional interventions to improve robustness. I would also distinguish again between the vision robustness and the LLM robustness. Vision robustness has looked very hard for a very long time, maybe a percent or 2 a year in performance on a sort of toy robustness task. So it has been elusive. However, in LLMs, it looks like things are different. So we put out a paper some months ago called circuit breakers, and that was looking pretty performant. It maybe added a 9 of reliability where you went from 90% reliable to 99% reliable or something like that. And we've been running a competition, it's currently ongoing, where we collect 25 different models, 3 of which are models with circuit breakers. And the other models are like Gemini, Claude, GPT-four, Mistral, Cohere, you name it. And then we look at how hard is it to jailbreak each of these. So we have an anonymized group of several 100 people, try and jailbreak these models and look at a cash prize if they're better at jailbreaking than other people. Basically, all the models fell by the wayside very quickly, except currently it's been a few days, I think 3 days or so that they've been trying to jailbreak the models with circuit breakers since there've been several thousands, maybe it's on the order of 20,000 plus different attempts at jailbreaking it. And it still hasn't been successfully jailbroken. I think that there is something going on in making AI systems a lot more reliable to jailbreaking due to specific algorithmic advances that do not necessarily follow from just scaling the model. I think this can also help alleviate the lack of robustness in vision. So in these multimodal models, they have this weak point, which is that the vision part can be attacked. But with circuit breakers, if you can basically break the representations and have them become dysfunctional whenever a harmful representation is triggered, that's the basic idea of it. If there's an image that has some adversarial noise in it that would try and cause the model to output something harmful, it goes through this generic transformer, and then we can just add circuit breakers and that can prevent the model from doing the harmful thing. This doesn't fix adversarial robustness entirely. Like, if you tried using your transformer on this image to classify it as a dog or a cat or a flower or something, circuit breakers wouldn't help you there. It just causes dysfunction. It just makes it cease to function. It doesn't make it correctly classify things. But maybe that's okay. Maybe we can just have it fail to do something or reject doing something to cause it not to output harmful cyber attack instructions or bioweapon instructions. So I think things are looking a lot more promising on the jailbreaking front. There still are limitations, for instance, although they haven't been jailbroken yet. It wouldn't surprise me if they're gonna be jailbroken like tomorrow, for instance, as people keep trying. But if it takes several thousands or tens of thousands of attempts on for a competent group of people to jailbreak it, that's a good sign. There's some caveats. 1 is that we were evaluating single turn, so they just try and input a prompt and cause it to do the wrong thing. This wasn't an extensive back and forth. That would maybe a competition for a later time, which should be a sort of like fuller evaluation, but at least in this more restricted setting, looks like you can get a lot more robustness than what the currently existing highly scaled up models have. So envision, I don't know if we're going get robust image classification, but at least for our AI agents, we may remove some of the vulnerabilities that would cause them to be susceptible to adversarial images that would cause them to output harmful requests. It varies, but it's not looking as bad as it looked in vision. Vision looked almost hopeless, and that'll be take the decade. But things are looking up at for at least for LLM's and multimodal agents.

Nathan Labenz (1:12:08) Let's take people through this representation engineering line of work. So I did cover the first representation engineering paper almost a year ago and did like a 20 minute solo monologue on it. There's that in the deep archive if folks want to go back and hear my original reaction to it. It came out almost exactly the same time as the toward monosemanticity paper from Anthropic. And so I paired those 2 together as 2 notable steps forward in terms of figuring out And you can maybe talk, first of all, a little bit about kind of the contrasting paradigms, because when I define mechanistic interpretability, I usually define it as the study of why AI models do what they do. So I said in my notes in preparation for this that you've done a lot of work on mechanistic interpretability. You said you don't think of yourself as doing that. So maybe give us the super zoomed out view of how you see these different approaches comparing and contrasting, give a little recap of representation engineering, and then we can get to the circuit breakers and then circle all the way back to robustness.

Dan Hendrycks (1:13:12) Yeah. So I think understanding the inner workings of AI systems would be more of interpretability more broadly. And then a sub part of that is trying to sort of model them as though there are circuits and mechanisms and the neurons have specific functions and how do they interact and piece together? What are specific fundamental mechanisms like copy and paste mechanisms, for instance, inside the model that can help us explain the behavior so that the project is partly let's build up this collection of mechanisms and we can glue them together. And this can then explain larger, more complex behavior of the model, such as what are all the processes invoked when they're solving a mathematics reasoning problem. I think it's very bottom up where you start with fundamental things at the neuron level and try to infer the properties and go up from there. Meanwhile, with representation engineering, you could also call it top down transparency or top down interpretability and mechanistic interpretability is bottom up. It starts with the representations, the highest level object in these. So the whole collection, the population of all the neurons, and then you try and just find concepts there and you try and break things down. So mechanistic will try and build up from the simplest unit of analysis, the neuron and build up 2 circuits. This will take representations and try and decompose those, understand them, process them, control them to do different things. So it makes it very easy to find arbitrary concepts like where it's emotion inside the network. Where's that represented? It's represented in this direction. Okay, where's truth? It's represented this direction. And if you take the negative of that, it'll go in more of a lying direction. What we do is we're looking at both the representations, namely the weights and activations and trying to read them to interpret them. So it's like mind reading. And then the other part of representation engineering would be like representation control or mind control in some looser sense That involves bending the representations to do what you want, and that can include things like circuit breakers. So you can find the representation associated with harmful outputs, and you can try and control that to whenever it's doing something harmful, train the network to bend that representation in a random direction so that it just messes up the whole network's function and then it can't perform the harmful task. It's basically adding trip wires the representation. So it's not just about activations and it's not just about addition. It's usually we get more performance modifying the weights in the representations and by tuning them to behave in different ways, but we are grabbing onto the representations as opposed to the output. So there's output level control like RLHF and DPO, and then there's these representation level control. And I think that this adds some extra constraints that can buy some extra robustness, for instance. In contrast, but to contrast between mechanistic interpretability and representation engineering a bit further, we're treating the fundamental unit of analysis as the representation, not the neuron. Representations with the collection of neurons work together to cause some new qualitatively distinct concepts to emerge that are not necessarily found in the individual neurons. Sometimes they're, but usually they're not. I think the neurons are just what a lot of this function is implemented on, but it's not necessarily the most productive to look at that level of analysis starting at the bottom. For instance, if I wanted to understand human psychology, I might just try and learn psychology and try and understand things at that level. Or I could go a level below. I could try and understand endocrinology and neuroscience, and then I could break the endocrinology down into biochemistry and then to chemistry and then to physics and particle physics. And so I could try and understand psychology through particle physics, but it's not necessarily the most productive because there are interesting concepts at the own level of analysis of psychology. There's its own ontology and things become very complicated in trying to build a staircase from those lower level concepts to these higher level ones. There can be staircases built between them though. There is biochemistry as an area and there can be some sort of mechanistic interpretability applied to representation. So I think that it's possible to build staircases, but I think generally it hasn't been that successful in dealing with complex systems. For instance, if we try and have a mechanistic understanding of the human body, this gives a little bit of mileage. This helps rule out various hypotheses, but it doesn't give us a very predictive model. We often need to just test the drug on various users and see whether it's healthy or not, or whether there are unexpected iatrogenic side effects. So I think likewise with deep learning systems, it can help filter things, some more mechanistic understanding filter hypotheses, but we ultimately care about functional explanations and philosophy. There's the distinction between functional explanations and mechanistic explanations. Mechanistic explanations for like, why does a flower tilt its head toward the sun? Mechanistic would be there's these chemicals that cause it to tilt in this way and that's the sort of cause. And the functional explanation would be so that it can get more energy. I think that the functional explanations are what we're really going after, not necessarily finding out what the specific mechanisms are that give rise to the result. I think with interpretability and explanations, there's a bit of philosophy of science to be had, which is what is a good explanation? Is it a mechanistic 1? Is it more of a function level 1? What is the right unit of analysis? What units capture the properties that you care about more reliably and less fragile. And I think the representations that is weights and activations are, I think, more suitable and more productive. And I think that's why we've been getting such good results in unlearning and in circuit breaking for jailbreak robustness, because it is a very productive way to analyze systems. I'm largely caring about what are the types of internal concepts in the model that I can use and control to get better lie detectors, to cause models to be more honest, to be more robust. That's the sort of focus. It's a bit more action driven or it's more collecting knowledge for action as opposed to trying to understand deep model deep learning models for its own sake. People can have different interests, but all primarily, be focused on what will improve performance on various things that we care about and use that as a guide for what things are useful to look at in the network and what things are.

Nathan Labenz (1:19:30) Just to compare and contrast a little bit, and you can then tell me what I'm missing. It seems like the sparse autoencoders, they're also definitely going beyond like individual neuron. Right? It starts with this observation that like, it's all polysemanticity and it's very hard to tease out. So we need to project this dense representation space onto a sparse representation space. And then we train extensively to do that. I think Anthropic has passed even 10,000,000 features that they learn, and then they go back and look and see which 1 of these appears to be what. And there's sort of an auto labeling step to that process as well. Mhmm. And then ideally, if it's all working well, you can get something like a Golden Gate Bridge feature, which you can then say, I want to control the model behavior by artificially pinning that at a high level. And lo and behold, we get a model that only wants to talk about the Golden Gate Bridge. Or for, like, detection sort of purposes, you could also run these things through filters. You probably couldn't filter against 10,000,000 plus features all the time. Computationally, that would slow things down a lot, but you could take your top 100 most concerning features that you've discovered and say, do any of these appear to be there at any given time? If so, halt the process or whatever. Mhmm. In contrast, what you're doing with representation engineering, you start with a more human notion at the beginning. Right? Where you start with something that's like, we want to identify the way in which something like harm is represented and then create a bunch of contrasting pairs and then use the differences between the representations with these contrasting pairs. This goes back to eliciting latent knowledge.

Dan Hendrycks (1:21:02) I think Colin Burns had an empirical paper on this. Discovering latent truth or something like that. That's a view as the impetus partly for this. That was taking over top down approach to try and understand what's going on inside of the nets, but then he didn't use it for controlling things. So he didn't modify the weights to cause it to be more truthful or less truthful and fine tune it in that way or fine tune at with representation level controls. So I kind of viewed as an outgrowth of that.

Nathan Labenz (1:21:31) Either way, if your goal is to create a Golden Gate Clawd or to have an alarm that goes off if the model is in some harmful state, it seems like you get basically the same sort of thing from either approach. Like, with the representation engineering approach, you have some sort of direction in activation space that you can monitor for. You can maybe tell us a little bit more about how you've now made that a lever that you can use in the training process. And with similarly too, with the sparse activation in coders, you get like a direction that you can look for or artificially tune up and down. Do you feel like these are just different ways of getting to the same thing, or is

Dan Hendrycks (1:22:08) there something more more fundamentally

Nathan Labenz (1:22:09) different about what they're generating?

Dan Hendrycks (1:22:11) There is a level of indirection it. And when the sparse auto encoders thing came out, which was sometime after the representation engineering paper, if I recall correctly, I remember speaking with Nat Freeman, and he's it looks like they're no longer interested in mechanistic stuff or, like, understanding things at a mechanistic level, but instead of hunting things to a more convenient space where basically it's a sort of collection of interesting representation. So I think it builds up from that neuron level to some intermediate space. And I think that that's a more productive level. Whether the sparse auto encoders are necessary to get some of this stuff is different to whether they provide a performance gain just from starting at the top. But I don't think it's at this sort of level of where's this mechanism inside of the network and how are these neurons connecting together? I think they've just been gravitating toward what's more productive, but it just isn't particularly in keeping with what they were doing the 5 plus years that they've been doing this type of research. But yeah, so I'm happy they're doing some sort of thing that's more productive. I don't think they were getting much mileage with the previous set of approaches. If they're creating something new, I don't know if I call it mechanistic interpretability, it's a sparse auto encodery type of thing. It's not really about underlying fundamental mechanisms inside the net as much. It's sort of what are some convenient extracted representations. Maybe those lose a lot of information in that extraction process. Supposedly, that's the case. And then maybe that gives some interesting handles and knobs to turn, and that that seems fine. I think they did accomplish some similar goals.

Nathan Labenz (1:23:39) I mean, I guess 1 more on that topic of the of just the contrasting approaches. It does seem to me like there's a sort of convergence happening at this, like, representation level. I could imagine maybe different micro skills coming out of the micro benefits, maybe micro strengths and weaknesses from the different approaches. Like, if I understand correctly, maybe you have a generalization of this. With the representation engineering approach, you start with a concept, right, of interest. Whereas with the sparse autoencoders, you start with just create some sparse representation and then we'll come back later and label those. And it is arguably minor miracle that that works.

Dan Hendrycks (1:24:22) Mhmm.

Nathan Labenz (1:24:23) So you would sort of wonder different things for different approaches. Right? If you're starting with a human generated concept, you might wonder, am I on the right track here? Am I defining pairs of things to kind concept? It's groups. Yes.

Dan Hendrycks (1:24:36) Groups. Yeah. Yeah. It could be here's harmful things that we don't want. Let's see what representations are stimulated there and then bend them to go in some different direction or something. But yeah. So that's just a small clarification. Yeah. There's different ways of doing representation sharing.

Nathan Labenz (1:24:49) But my sort of it's not even a concern. It's just a sense that they might be they're converging, but they still feel complimentary to me in the sense that I could wonder if with the top down approach, do I have the right concept? I might be missing what really matters. Might just be thinking about it the wrong way. The AIs might be like doing something totally different from what the human's intuition would suggest. And then on the sparse autoencoder side, it's like, you have the question of like, did I interpret this thing correctly? Did I label it correctly? Maybe there's, like, allegedly a ton of apparently, like, nonsense features or, like, very hard to label or interpret features that you might again be sort of missing. There's also these weird geometries that they seem to be discovering where and just to state what that is, it's like when when there's too many concepts to represent and you can't do 1 neuron at a time anymore, then you start to pack in a polysemantic way. And then when there's too many concepts such that you can't just have all pure directions in that space, then you start to have these sort of different geometries in that space where the the things are no longer fully orthogonal to represent, and you can't do 1 neuron at a time anymore. Then you start to pack in a polysemantic way. And then when there's, like, too many concepts such that you can't just have all pure directions in that space, then you start to have these sort of different geometries in that space where the the things are no longer fully orthogonal to each other. But as long as they're, like, close enough to orthogonal and don't coincide very often, then that also can seem to work. And so you have these, like, weird geometry things. I don't know that you would be able to find that sort of thing with the representation engineering approach?

Dan Hendrycks (1:26:30) Well, if I have this representation and this representation and what leads to at the level of representation of analysis to how do these sort of interact, what's the relation to each other, and there might be a third representation that sort of mediates on them. Or if you destroy that representation, then those sort of representations no longer are effective. So I think that there is a sort of set of rules 1 can try and understand at that level of analysis as well, and further understanding can lead to, I think, some discovery of those. But in general, to the point of bottom up views and top down views in science, they tend to be somewhat complementary. For instance, some people have gotten mileage trying to understand the brain and pretend that it, you know, behaves more like a computer chip, like a CPU. Some try and think of it more as a complex adaptive system. And there's I think both have led to some insights. I think there's differences in in productivity of if we're tend to be looking at functional behavior versus underlying fundamental mechanism. So it depends, but this is the story has played out in other fields in science. I think both have produced at least non trivial knowledge on both ends, but sometimes some views are more productive than others.

Nathan Labenz (1:27:45) Let's get now to the circuit breakers and this I don't know if it's still the most recent paper. It was at least until recently your most recent paper was on tamper resistance in models. So you're starting with these identifiable or, like, human concepts of harm, truthfulness, whatever, figuring out ways to put the model into different states, which on a principled level, you can then say, okay. All the truthful things seem to be pointing this direction. All the lying things to be pointing other direction. We sort of aggregate that and say, this appears to be the truth direction. This appears to be the anti truth direction. Okay. Cool. Now how do we build a circuit breaker on top of that, and how do we build tamper proof resistance on top of that?

Dan Hendrycks (1:28:25) Yeah. I'll I'll use the example of expert level virology knowledge. What we'll do is we'll just take lots of papers associated with expert level virology, and there'll be lots of representations that come from it. So a collection of representations because it's not all just 1 direction. So we take those representations, and then we dispose the model to have those representations be turned in a random direction, just something different, something orthogonal. And that messes up the expert level virology representations. And then we take normal data and on normal data, we want the model to behave as it would normally. We try and preserve its representations on other sorts of inputs and try and mess up its representations on expert level virology type of inputs. This lets us bend the representations to get something called circuit breakers, where whenever it starts to think about things that involve expert level virology, its representations get messed up and then it doesn't function. This just works pretty well and buys a lot of adversarial robustness, but it isn't robust to people trying to fine tune the model. If they try and remove the circuit breakers, they can easily do that. Circuit breakers are right now a good solution for models behind an API, but models that get fine tuned, that's a different situation. So that's what the tamper resistance paper is about. How can we have model safeguards be tamper resistant? So the idea for that is we simulate adversaries who are trying to remove the circuit breakers. And then we try and add circuit breakers that make it really tough for the adversary to get them all in even if they try a lot. And this basically works reasonably and generalizes to a lot of new unforeseen adversaries. So it seems that maybe we will be able to have safeguards in open weight models that are tamper resistant. And that can be useful for having the benefits of open weight models without some of the weaponization risks that may come from more advanced models. I was very surprised that this could work. I was surprised for months, but it seems like progress can be made. It's not clear if we'll wind up in a state like adversarial robustness and images where there is definite progress, but it's very slow. Maybe things will be easier for LLMs, just as was the case with jailbreaking, but hopefully there'll be more research on that to capture the benefits from open weight models while mitigating some of their downsides. It's surprising that weights can withstand various optimizers. So we'll work on trying to robustify it even further and come up with better methods that are robust to more and more optimizers and optimizers that optimize for more steps and blow more compute. But yeah, it's strange, but it did empirical validation and the code is available and seems to be attractable or

Nathan Labenz (1:31:21) a

Dan Hendrycks (1:31:21) problem that is showing a lot of promising science, and we do have some traction on it.

Nathan Labenz (1:31:24) Just to make sure I understand the actual technique in both of these, I think they're similar, right? The circuit breaker 1 has a and this is a huge theme because it's come up on many episodes of this podcast where there is another term of the loss function essentially that's introduced, right, where you are now both penalizing the model for having certain representations. And so thus pushing it away from those representations while also still continuing to train on the main objective of do a good job. So these representations are hard coded. Is that right? Like when you're going through this circuit breaking, I guess this is a post training process. Right? You're starting with a pre trained model. You're going through the process of detecting harmfulness, this, that, and the other thing. How many of these do we need to be worried about? Are there some that we didn't think of in our initial exploration? How many do you have? And it's essentially sort of a cosign or kind of projection. Right? You just basically say, we have these certain hard coded known representation states that we want to avoid. We monitor how close it is to that. If it gets too close, it's a penalty. All the while still reinforcing

Dan Hendrycks (1:32:41) It's like that.

Nathan Labenz (1:32:41) It's doing a good job. Yeah.

Dan Hendrycks (1:32:43) Something like that. It's more data driven, the elicitation of the representation. So we're just seeing what gets very stimulated when it's seeing and thinking about text on a certain topic. And then whatever the representations are there, then try and counteract them. So this requires some good data engineering, and having good data to preserve the original functionality. So it's basically that's the idea behind the circuit breakers and the tamper resistant training is basically trying to make circuit breakers be more robust. So can you add circuit breakers that generalize to adversaries trying to fine tune the model to do harmful things. And so it's not just adding the circuit breakers in the normal way. It's trying to add circuit breakers that'll generalize and make it hard for adversaries to contort the weights to have the safeguards removed. So yeah, it's an additional strengthener on top of circuit breakers. It's more maybe it's can be thought of in some ways as more like densely spread or circuit breakers or something.

Nathan Labenz (1:33:46) The circuit breaker paper, the first 1, I feel like I have a decent enough intuition for. How many, by the

Dan Hendrycks (1:33:54) way, how many different, like,

Nathan Labenz (1:33:56) bad categories did you define in that paper?

Dan Hendrycks (1:33:59) We just focused on different weaponization risks. So we did for some chemical weapon, for some bioweapon types of things. You can make it broader to do harms and more like torts and crimes and things like that. So it's it's flexible. Flexible. You can do a variety of different types of representations.

Nathan Labenz (1:34:18) So again, here the goal is to create this circuit breaker functionality where when certain states are encountered, the model just won't go there and to make that robust to fine tuning. So you could even give somebody the open weights and say, okay, now try to fine tune. And we know, of course, and again, covered many previous episodes, we know that with standard post training, I think I've seen as few as like 10 examples can be enough when you do the fine tuning to even often accidentally remove the refusal behavior. So we know that the current state of the art that's widely in use is not robust at all. So it's a big leap to say we want to make it hard to the point where you practically can't succeed. You'd be better off training your own model from scratch or whatever than trying to fine tune this 1. And this gets quite complicated where there is a sort of inner and outer loop, right, where you're doing the fine tuning, seeing how the fine tuning is changing the model, and then Mhmm. Fine tuning the model itself to go away from the fine tuning or to sort of neutralize the fine tuning. Mhmm. I confess I don't have a great intuition for exactly how that's working. That's kind of been a theme is our intuitions may be limited, but what we can measure maybe is really what matters.

Dan Hendrycks (1:35:32) You can make good guesses as to what will work. And I think generally algorithm design, there's trying out just a lot of different intuitions and plausible guesses, and then some small subset of them will end up working. Yeah, I wouldn't be surprised if if I go into details of it wouldn't surprise me if we'll put out some sort of paper with 6 different modifications to that loop that make it just ultimately quite a bit better. But I think the general idea is there's simulating adversaries trying to mess with the model and then move in the direction that makes the adversarial fine tuning have a higher loss or be harder to get at in the future when they try and optimize it in the next step. So it's yeah, there is this inner and outer loop. I think that'll probably stay, but the exact terms and losses, I think, will probably end up changing. It's sort of like adversarial training, where you would have an adversarial example be optimized and you'll try and adjust the weights so as to generalize to the adversarial example. And so this is adjusting the weights so as to withstand an adversary's attempt at modifying the weights in a harmful direction specifically. But yeah, think that high level is probably roughly accurate. And if you look under the hood, I think probably many of the details will end changing as we come up with better methods.

Nathan Labenz (1:36:44) The only other thing I've seen that's similar to this is a paper called SOFAN out of a Chinese group. They're working with much smaller models than you're using in this paper, but they have a theory of trying to create a loss function that converges to a smooth bottom local minimum so that they call it fine tuning resistance. I think your tamper resistance is probably better branding. People like fine tuning. People don't maybe like tampering so much. But you said that you don't really think of this as, like, targeting a specific shape of the loss curve because you've just generally feel like that hasn't worked super well. And I guess that doesn't seem to be exactly what's happening in this case.

Dan Hendrycks (1:37:32) Yeah. I remember in the late 2000 tens, there's a lot about trying to get specific properties of lost landscapes and saddle points and things like that, or like really smooth local minima as opposed to sharp ones. But that didn't seem like terribly productive. So when I'm having intuitions about what's going on in the Nets, I tend not to think in terms of those concepts just because they've been known to be a bit misleading. Instead, it's more just like what sort of tools and what combination of different steps seems like natural for a deep learning algorithm and trying some of those out. We should do an exponential moving average here. That's not in view of what that'll ultimately do to a loss landscape, which exponential moving averages are generally good idea. And that's more what I'll think about of optimizing at the level of the coherence and simplicity and reasonable guesses of what sort of tricks have generally worked in aggregating those together as opposed to some broader view as to what's happening mathematically in inside of the network. I find it personally, at least for me less productive.

Nathan Labenz (1:38:34) Yeah, it's interesting. I should have said earlier too, the intuition for why you would want to have a smooth bottom loss function for the purposes of fine tuning resistance is when you're doing any sort of training on a neural network, you're taking the gradient and then moving in the direction of the gradient with obviously subject to complication in terms of the optimizer and how much momentum and whatever, all that stuff. But Mhmm. The idea of this SOF on paper is if we can get to a smooth bottom 0 point, then the gradient at that point vanishes. And so when you go come try to do fine tuning, like, there is no step to take because there is no gradient there, and so you're stuck in that minimum. And you're saying your way of thinking about these problems is less about the goal and more about kind of the procedure that you would imagine going through to hopefully take good steps in the right direction. So instead of saying, I think I can land in this place, you're like, if I just create a loop where I do fine tuning and then outside of that, I, like, change the model to resist the fine tuning Mhmm. Then maybe that'll work. And so you just

Dan Hendrycks (1:39:40) try it. Yeah. Like, it's sort of just what in the design, does the design feel a little unnatural given like, given all the sets of deep learning tricks that have worked well? So for instance, with the RLHF, it wasn't like, oh, the lost landscape is really bad or something. It's not a big piecewise functions. It's more just that there's some that maybe should be smoothened right there. And likewise, with this method, it's like, why don't we try what worked well in adversarial robustness was to train on a bigger set, train on more adversaries, Maybe when we're taking this gradient step, maybe we should take 1 of the ideas from Nesterov momentum or something like that. Maybe we should do some smoothening here and there because that helped an adversarial training in images. Maybe we should have a schedule where the adversaries get initially start out weaker and then they start out stronger that sometimes teaches the net to learn better. Things like that are more of how we'll generally approach things instead of having specific intuitions as to exactly what's going on. And so, yeah, you can see that in the attitude and for representation engineering as well. We're not going to completely understand how it's making its decisions completely, but I think we can still get a lot of mileage in trying to measure some certain risks and trying to reduce them through good deep learning techniques, which will tend to generalize and work reasonably well. It's just a difference in aesthetic and different how 1 will approach problems.

Nathan Labenz (1:41:02) With the techniques as they currently are, how close would you say we are right now to something that, for example, like a meta could apply to say, LLM 3.2 or LLM 4? The kind of key dimensions there would seem to be like, how much does it cost? What is the compute overhead to do this sort of thing? I understand it's not trivial. And then also, what is the performance penalty? Because there's always these trade offs. Right? It's not gonna be at 0 performance penalty. So where are we on those dimensions? Maybe there's other dimensions you also think are important.

Dan Hendrycks (1:41:35) I I think it's primarily the performance trade offs. So, like, SOFON almost made the models go to almost completely destroy the representations in some cases. This is a better trade off, but it's still quite significant. It's like adversarial robustness in vision, where if you do adversarially train the models, it does harm the average case performance. That's not the case with circuit breakers. Circuit breakers poses minimal trade offs, but tamper resistant circuit breakers are much more costly performance wise. So I don't think it's suitable for production yet. I think circuit breakers can be suitable for production though. And maybe that'll change. Hopefully, the trade off will be lessened and hopefully, there'll be more tamper resistance put into the models. I think there's many papers that still have to be written though, to reduce these sorts of trade offs. Because right now, we are seeing trade offs, like what we see when you adversarially train vision models, which is a noticeable hit. It doesn't ruin the model, but it knocks it down a substantial peg.

Nathan Labenz (1:42:33) Speaking of trade offs, a couple of things you've said have reminded me of the work of biologist Michael Levin, who has been a past guest on the podcast, he has a very similar notion about biology as you seem to with respect to deep learning neural networks where he's, yeah, you can try to build up from all the protein DNA RNA interactions and simulate all of those. Eventually, yes, that stuff does cash out on some high level to what we care about. But there are also interfaces. Likes to give the example of people have been training horses and dogs for a long time without knowing anything about the inner workings of their biology because there is this higher level interface. Mhmm. But then he said something really interesting to me, which was he thinks there is a fundamental tension between interpretability on the 1 hand and robustness on the other hand. He said in in an adversarial world, if your system is too interpretable, it will be hacked. And all sorts of, like, parasites and whatever will come along and figure out how to exploit you. And so a big part of the reason perhaps that our biology is so crazy complicated is that it makes it harder for other things to evolve to harm us. Do you think that's trade off also may exist in a deep learning context?

Dan Hendrycks (1:43:54) I would interpret his statement about sometimes it doesn't make sense to look under the hood. I agree with that. That's what sort of emergence is partly about. We generally want systems where you don't have to look under the hood. When literally with a car, I don't want to look under the hood. I don't want to figure out this sort of mechanism. I want it just to work. And likewise, with if you're having a go program, you can specify it at a high level of here's MCTS, here's the equation, etcetera. And then you can specify a level lower where there's tensor and then that can get specified a level lower with AVX instructions and driver instructions on the GPU, and then things like assembly. And we generally don't need to worry about what the assembly looks like at all to reason about the program or reason about the strategies that the Go program might end up using. So if we're trying to interface with the Go program by playing with it, I don't need to reason about assembly. I don't need to reason about the TensorFlow code at all, unless there's some regularity conditions where it doesn't apply, such as if the temperature in the server room gets really hot, then maybe the program will start to get a lot slower. And then this can end up affecting its overall play. But usually we can be protected from those details and we want to engineer systems where we are protected from those details, where we can avoid looking under the hood. To the second point about the exploitability with higher transparency, I think the good regulator theorem from cybernetics, which is if you are trying to regulate or control a system, the best regulator will have a model of that system, not a model of 20% of the system, but a model of the full system. So that's a pressure that evolved for theory of mind. We needed to be able to have higher cognitive empathy to figure out how people are feeling in reaction to us so that we can interface with them in a better way. So I think the good regulator theorem being a theorem is correct. And I think the complexity that we see in deep learning systems and biological systems, well, they're complex adaptive systems and complex adaptive systems are evolved to harness stressors, some of which are adversarial, some of which are just thrown at them by nature or by accident. I think the only things that are able to adapt to new stressors in a robust way are complex adaptive systems. But then you end up getting all the complications of complex adaptive systems where they aren't just as productively viewed as a big collection of mechanisms, but something in their own right with a lot of different emergent properties. I think this makes a fundamental tension that for security systems that are not adaptive, are sitting ducks are more exploitable and systems that are completely transparent do stand more of a risk compared to if they have a shroud of obscurity around them. Although people don't like security through obscurity in practice, it is extremely common and buys a lot of security. Closing the windows or putting the blinds down when presenting a new algorithmic advance, although it's just obscurity, it can help. So in the case of tamper resistance, yeah, I think the open weight models basically are put at a substantial disadvantage because the adversary knows everything there is to know about the system compared to if they're trying to break or manipulate a model behind an API for which they don't know the weights or the architecture and can't compute gradients on it and don't have full rewrite access. So I think tamper that that's something that will just make tamper resistance very difficult.

Nathan Labenz (1:47:19) The other argument that you hear from folks like Zuckerberg and Yam Lakun is that open source software is the most secure software and it's by open sourcing that we will collectively figure out the weaknesses and do something about them. Is there way that both of these can be true, or do you do we have to take 1 side of this on this question?

Dan Hendrycks (1:47:40) I think overall, there's maybe in the long term things are in favor of defense. Right now, there's more of a duality, at least for traditional software. For current AI systems though, if they're making a bug, it's not like we just patch overnight. But what makes open source software work is that if there are a lot of eyeballs on it, all bugs are shallow, so to speak. If we just have lots of people look at the weights of the neural network, they're not gonna understand what's going on. And even if they did diagnose some problem, it's not necessarily clear how you could just immediately patch that. So they're constructed in a very different way. If you had a scan of my brain, for instance, or if you had labeled every single neuron in their brain, it's not clear you'd understand what they're going to do in novel situations without just running the model. So with very large complex systems, often the system is its own best explanation and scrutinizing individual parts of it doesn't necessarily help. So I'll just elaborate on the point I had touched on. If you had annotated every neuron in a human's brain and assigned a little function to it, you could say this neuron corresponds to a whisker at 15 degrees. And this is the upper left fraction of an airplane wheel subject to its colors being between this and this or something. If you have a huge collection of that, and then you have many billions of these or trillions of these, not clear you're going to understand the system. Just for instance, I understand individual people. Does that mean if you list off the professions, I can understand those to some extent? That doesn't mean I understand the economy or the emergent functionality that will come from it. What new inventions are around the corner or anything, like when you actually run the economy, even if I can understand at a high level what a carpenter does and what a plumber does and what an IRS agent does, it still doesn't give me much of an overall model. Understanding the parts doesn't let me understand the whole or the larger collective function of what will end up happening. I haven't seen anything analogous where people are doing LLM 3.1 and then doing small patches of, oh, it gets this question wrong and we patch patch. That doesn't seem to be what we're dealing with here. So that's why I think that calling it open weight is more appropriate because it is inheriting many of these open source type of connotations when this it just basically isn't like traditional software. And I think it's fairly inaccurate to describe them in any way. They're not constructed in a similar way whatsoever. We throw a huge amount of data and huge amount of compute, and when we let it stew or grow, so to speak, for months, and then out pops something. And then we see what's it capable of. We have no idea. That's quite different from traditional software where every line is manually inserted in a top down way, and it's a large collection of specific sharp rules as opposed to a big bundle of of weak connections. I I don't think it's true. I think we see the the same type of thing happening with deep learning. There isn't LLM 3.1, the latest Tuesday update, where it's been patched on some of the MMLU examples where it was getting them wrong. This just isn't what we see. That said, it still can be useful for safety. There's still research and it still provides information, the ability to make the systems better, but not in the same way. And so it's not necessarily safest compared to traditional software, especially when they're more powerful. But I'm generally a pro open source right now. I think if they get expert level virologist, I don't know if I want that being released. Sorry to say, because you'll run some substantial risks of bioweapons. If they can walk you through building a bioweapon or walk anybody building through a bioweapon, that seems like a proliferation of a weapon of mass destruction. I think that weapon of mass destruction should not be or things that greatly enable by several orders of magnitude people's abilities to create weapons of mass destructions. I think that's something we as a society will not be able to bear. But maybe there'll be some ways out of this. Maybe we'll get tamper resistant training and things like that, which will make that become a possibility. But at least currently now, I think that in the future we'll need to a cost benefit analysis or whether it's overall beneficial to release the weights. But right now I think that it is more positive than negative.

Nathan Labenz (1:51:48) So when you mentioned the idea that the model is, like, the best sort of way to understand itself or I forget exactly how you phrased it, but I liked it.

Dan Hendrycks (1:51:59) It The model is its best explanation.

Nathan Labenz (1:52:01) Yes. All to my

Dan Hendrycks (1:52:02) in some different ways and it'll fail compared to just, like, seeing the its overall functional behavior. What it does is what it is.

Nathan Labenz (1:52:10) So that very much reminded me of Steven Wolfram's worldview in general and the fact that he's got these remarkable sort of unpredictable outputs from small cellular automata has a very similar vibe to it. He recently put out a post on machine learning and basically makes the case again that like it's all about computational irreducibility. This argument seems to me to be ultimately to get to the point where it's you just fundamentally can't predict. Right? You have to run the system. There is no other way to do it. Do you think that is ultimately true of these deep learning systems? We can take bites out of it this way and that way, but in the end, there is no such thing as provably safe AI, for example, that you can't know until you run it in a absolute sense.

Dan Hendrycks (1:52:56) So I I I think generally for anticipating a lot of the corner cases, a lot of the corner cases will be found by accident and that you can't derive that through some sort of armchair contemplation or theoretical model of the deep learning system. So there will always be a lot of those corner cases and quirks, which require having access to the system and not just to a collection of some platonic ideals or idealizations of what's going on. So for provably safe AI, I really don't know how there's supposed to be tractability for that. Maybe if we have a superhuman mathematician bot, you'd be able to figure something out that's very surprising in general and gives us a lot of theoretical mileage. But I'm generally pretty pessimistic about various proofs for for things in absolute certainty and 0 corner cases ever. I think the philosophy in safety engineering when dealing with these complex adaptive systems is generally not proofs, but instead other sorts of safety engineering principles such as defense in-depth. In nuclear power plants, they don't prove that it will never fail. They instead have lots of different safety measures, protective and preventive measures that stop bad things from happening in the first place. And if they do happen, there are protections from having it not get out of control. And if you stack many of those together, you can get some very high levels of reliability. Individually, each of those components are not extremely reliable and that you would stake the entire power plant on, but collectively, they can work together fairly well. So I think in deep learning, the main way we'll get some of this safety is a variety of these different measures. For instance, let's say you're trying to stop risks of weaponization from these models when they're more capable. Well, there's a variety of things you can do. You can add circuit breakers, for instance, and you can do some input filtering to screen for is this the type of request that seems off, that won't be perfect, circuit breakers won't be perfect. You can do some sort of output monitoring of is this a user that is tending to make lots of weird weaponization related requests, and then you might inspect their account. You can also do know your customer regimes, where if you kick off somebody who's been doing a lot of weaponization related questions, they can't just come back and make a new account a second later. So I think collectively those 4 interventions of an input filter, circuit breakers, of output monitoring and know your customer, I think can reduce the risk very appreciably, make it be almost possibly negligible, depending on the reliability of each of those components. I think that's probably what we'll end up having in practice, and I don't think there's much of a need for complete guarantees if that makes the risks negligible. I don't know the intuition that would make 1 think it's tractable to make things provable. They might think that it's necessary, but I don't think it's necessary. I think you just need the risks to be negligible, and I think you can arrive at that through good safety engineering.

Nathan Labenz (1:55:49) Yeah. I think on that point for what it's worth, I think even the, I had 2 authors of the provably safe AI, like, group position paper on not too long ago, and they basically advocate the same thing. They're not saying that there is a knockdown proof in the general case and definitely still advocating for a defense in-depth strategy overall. So it's more of a, as I understand their proposal now having spoken to them about it, I I would say it's less about actual proof and more about proof subject to some assumptions, which is probably ultimately only 1 measure out of Mhmm. Several.

Dan Hendrycks (1:56:27) I guess when interacting with Bengio on this sort of topic, it seemed that it was like more proofs and the defense in-depth thing wasn't as much that 1 was pushing for. But but yeah, that cert certainly it's not complete total proofs, but it's proofs under some certain assumptions. I would just be afraid that those would be fairly limited and that the intellectual energies could be spent on things like reliability. Like there's certainly a lot more work that needs to be done on reliability. I think there's probably a handful of groups working on tamper resistance, for instance, and on making circuit breakers plus there are probably not that many people either. I think a lot of the people who are interested in safety gravitate toward things that represent a different sensibility. I think it's more of a mechanistic type of sensibility and as well as a certainty, intellectual certainty type of sensibility, which would explain some attraction to guarantees in mathematics. I should say that when I do research, I will very often do this sort of psychological sort of analysis as to what's going on. Other people don't like doing that though, but I find it gives me a lot of mileage for trying to figure out like, is this a real area or is this some sort of thing that people want to be a real area and will act as though is real area and try and will into existence? I think a lot of theoretical research would have that there is the people who would work on a Bayesian neural networks were the same people who would work on neural tangent kernels, were the same people who worked on these sort of this generalization research about implicit biases in neural network training and implicit biases in gradient descent. I think that they're connected largely through, not because those areas are particularly promising research areas, but instead because they're sort of the best available subject to the skill set of having a lot of mathematical ability and a high level of interest in mathematics and machine learning. So I think that some of these other approaches to safety are like subject to having some temperamental interests. And then I have different temperamental interests. I'm not really into this sort of mechanistic stuff for absolute certainty. I think it's more chaotic, practical and more entrepreneurial, so to speak. I don't think the interest in it is just because it's looking really promising. I think there's some other things that work, such as wanting a type of solution and that sort of just clicking with some people's interests more.

Nathan Labenz (1:58:47) So when you say you do the psychological profiling exercise, your own approach is to say, I wanna go to the things that are kind of inelegant, unaesthetic and

Dan Hendrycks (1:58:57) brute force. The unprestigious stuff, think is really underrated roughly. I think in safety, the most prestigious thing would be to do research and I don't do research all day. I do other sorts of stuff, policy or field building and managing projects and things like that. And I think in research as well, I would focus on collecting data sets. We're talking to MMLU, that collecting data sets, just ask people on MTurk to give you the data set, problem solved. And so part of the reason I would do some method development is just to show that I can do it, not just sort of datasets person, like data augmentation things during grad school, things like that. So I think generally this like less prestigious work is generally a better thing to focus on. That's usually where there's some value. I generally try and work on things that other people are not as interested in working on. And then when lots of people are interested in it, then I usually leave and work on something else. So maybe tamper resistance will be a bigger thing in, you know, 6 months, then I'll stop working on it. And likewise for like circuit breakers or rep e or something.

Nathan Labenz (2:00:00) Maybe this next question is a chance to brainstorm on it a little bit. You're you're given at least some of what your intuition is around how to find neglected approaches to AI safety. I recently did another episode with Judd Rosenblatt and Mike Viana from AE Studio. And it's really remarkable company. They built this whole for profit company with the mission from the beginning of doing the highest value AI safety work that they could. And they've recently pivoted their whole approach based on the sense that timelines are coming in. They did a big survey to try to identify what are people bullish on, what are they not bullish on. Their findings were like, the field of AI safety does not think that they're on track to solve AI safety challenges broadly. And so they came to this conclusion that we we need lots more investments into otherwise neglected approaches. They've taken some really interesting inspiration from biology and have 2 recent papers out, which I'll not get into because we did it in that episode on self modeling and also self other distinction minimization. Interested in your take on those papers, those approaches, maybe even more generally like biology inspired approaches in general. And then also what's on your mind right now in terms of what is neglected? What should more people be digging into that they're for whatever reason?

Dan Hendrycks (2:01:18) Yeah. So I I think that generally almost any source of inspiration is fine if it works for people. So the very careful, hyper rigorous thinking can add some of these constraints in the creative process too early, Just taking some vague inspiration from biology seems like a good idea for idea generation. I'll look at people's creative processes when they make music. It's like Jack Antonoff, for instance, upload some examples of him making music, and I get a lot out of that seeing his sort of process there. For other sorts of musicians and movie directors as well, I think that helps me a lot in giving me some sort of ideas on how to lay track in front of a moving train effectively in a research project. And I think that the idea itself, though, beyond the source of inspiration seems very good intuition. I think the models have cognitive empathy. They can guess people's emotions reasonably, but whether that resonates with their internals is a different question. And that would be a matter of more compassionate empathy. Do they actually feel motivated or disposed in a certain way in view of the model of others? So I think something in that direction seems seems worth investigating further. Yeah. So I think it's I look forward to that in particular. I don't give faint praise generally.

Nathan Labenz (2:02:38) You and Elias are both. Elias are said about that. I don't have the exact quote in front of me, but it was something like, not obviously stupid on my first read. I rarely give reviews this positive. Any other neglected approaches, especially if you're not gonna turn to next?

Dan Hendrycks (2:02:53) Yeah, because I guess I'm doing some benchmarking stuff and I think probably maybe some AI well-being related things. I'm just thinking in drafting the XAI risk management policy, and then what are we gonna do about AI well-being? And I just have lots of question marks currently. It's just I don't know. What are we even gonna measure? What are we even gonna do? If there could be some clarity, if there's given this theory of consciousness, here's your sort of measure or something like that. Given this theory of consciousness, you just go through these theories of consciousness or something. That that could be helpful. I think there are a few, like, demos and examples where they're dishonest, but not good measurements. Truthful QA was the default 1, but it was to compute correlated as we showed in the safety washing paper. So I that's it seems largely to just be measuring compute for the most part. Other research things I'm waiting to see what will happen with the 10 x larger models that are arising later this year, early next year. In the meantime, there's measuring a variety of things, like agent skills in humanities last exam and virology skills and better circuit breakers and more tamper resistance and more reliability. But yeah, then I think maybe we'll have agents from that. Then that will create a whole new variety of issues. I think some other thing I'm working on, which I think is a little interesting is what should the ethics of these agents be? What should the actual proposals be? But that's not as much of a research question. Maybe that's like people who know some legal people should get in discussions with them and try and figure out some ideas there. I think the largest gaps in the intellectually outside of machine learning safety research and more broad AI safety, more broadly construed of stuff that isn't machine learning research would be suggesting strategies about what we should do, what things to push for, what are some coherent worldviews in identifying those and writing those up. So I think for instance, like Leo's thing was very good for identifying a specific worldview of the very short timelines and intelligence explosion, 1 in algorithmic progress matters a lot. Some of those points are definitely argue about, and I don't believe as much as he does. But I think there are other views just right up, like what is the national competitiveness platform that is low regret? I think that hasn't been particularly explored. I think people trying to zoom out and look more than just technical research and see how some of these technical questions and their their skill sets can bear on and interact with more complex geopolitical or social or ethical or legal questions is probably where things are most neglected. And there's probably a lot more low hanging fruit there as well. It's not easy, but I think research is probably harder. I think you're more likely to pay at research just because there haven't been that many good papers across the years. There's thousands of people researching these sorts of things. There's, I don't know, a few people thinking about security mechanisms for GPUs that enable a verification regime for international governance, for instance. I think these intersection issues are maybe the more productive thing for people to focus on.

Nathan Labenz (2:05:55) You mentioned that you're working on the the risk management framework for XAI. I guess I take that to be AI's answer to responsible scaling policy. Is that, like, the right way to think about it?

Dan Hendrycks (2:06:06) Yeah. Just trying to be somewhat broader and just a variety of sources of risk, and I just want more ideas from safety engineering brought to bear. What are other sorts of risks beyond risks from scaling to deal with? Yeah.

Nathan Labenz (2:06:19) So 1 thing that has definitely stood out to me about the XAI program is the, you might call it, truth maxing goal that Elon has put out in, I think, mostly just tweet form so far. Coming from, like, the old school days, the paper clip maximizer thought experiment, I have always tended to think that anything maxing if the system is powerful enough is probably a bad idea. And I like the constitutional AI vibe where we have a couple of different competing values of, in their case, helpful, honest, harmless, sometimes their intention. And the system has to figure out how to balance those and trade them off against each other. And it's not perfect. It's messy, but then so are human values. We seem to get by on that basis. Mhmm. What do you make of your truth, Max? I mean, we could chalk that up to Elon will be Elon on Twitter, but seems like there's something pretty fundamental there. Do you think that there is a way to have a truth maxing AI that would be still maybe not provably safe, but, like, qualitatively as safe as a constitutional trained AI system?

Dan Hendrycks (2:07:24) I should note, I'm not speaking on behalf of of XAI here or for Elon. I can largely speak out my interpretations, things he said, and how I try and square all these different organizational goals together in a more coherent risk management policy. So I think he sees a societal risk and is focusing on a societal risk. So normally when people are talking about AI risk and risks that will make AI not go well, People are largely talking about risks emanating from individual AIs. I don't think he intuits instrumental convergence as much of problem. In fact, I think it is a bit more questionable and in the AI safety textbook, we discuss arguments for and against instrumental convergence and how strong 1 might expect that, whether 1 should, by default, expect whatever goal you give the AI systems, they become very power seeking. We'll definitely get more of a sense of how strong those tendencies are when we have AI agents soon. So he's thinking that there are in our risk management policy, the draft of it, it's totally unofficial and maybe it'll change tomorrow. But I'm currently just imitating the Department of Defense's risk management framework from 2001, where they split things up into personnel risks, operational risks, and institutional risks, and we just modify this to machine learning system risks and operational risks. And instead of institutional, it's societal risks. And inside of societal risks, there's a variety of different risks, like bad competitors racing on safety and trying to undermine regulation. That is a risk. And so and so fortunately, we launched on things like should be the only major AI player to actually fully support s p 10 47. But there is another type of risk, which would be generally public epistemics are not that good, and they need to be in really good shape when we are dealing with this transition to more powerful AI systems and the emergence of AI life forms, so to speak. Things will move very quickly. A lot of important decisions will be made. Biggest period in at least the past 200000 years possibly. And so public understanding if they're to be included in these decision making processes needs to be very good. And so that can look like a variety of things, like trying to make sure that rock is more truthful, add features to the x platform to summarize news in an objective way. And so these are various things that can improve public epistemics and mitigate a societal risk that would definitely bear on whether AI goes well or not. So I think that compared to other organizations that are saying we're going to be the best on safety, whatever that means, they basically safety watch the research. There's a particular focus on a specific societal risk. And after having got a basic competent LLM now, there can be more of a focus on adding some of these more epistemic features that improve public epistemics. This trades off on some other notions of harmfulness. This allows by making models less censored. 1 could think that could increase harms in some other sorts of ways. But like what Anthropic has, I think generally competitors or competing companies of XAI will censor something if it might be offensive to someone and that's the threshold. At XAI, it's currently more if it's legal, it's okay. If it's not illegal, it's not okay. So no copyright, no defamation. But in the future, maybe we'll change the standard to, and I'm not speaking on behalf of them, but personally, I think an attractive option is to make the AI chatbots and AI agents exercise reasonable care so that they do not foreseeably cause harms to other people. And by harms, I mean, stuff you would wind up in court over, not something that is minorly offensive or perturb someone. And

Nathan Labenz (2:11:05) that

Dan Hendrycks (2:11:05) might be the sort of the type of ethics and restrictions placed on it, but still sorting that out. And that can allow for a lot of truthful information to disseminate, but not necessarily specific bioweapon instructions, for instance, if those would actually foreseeably cause harm. So I think it's less the training objective equals truth, but instead is we are or I should say, XAI is focusing on some other risk sources and trying to specifically target them with AI technology while being responsible in AI development along the way.

Nathan Labenz (2:11:41) So if I try to bottom line that, I would say you're saying big picture fullness of AI potential power, probably not a good idea to go all in on truth maxing, but as a kind of current day competitive positioning and maybe way to counterbalance the arguably mistaken choices of others being less censorious, more truthful, and leaving the harm reduction piece to the future when harms are greater, focusing more on shared epistemic, success now is the overall strategy.

Dan Hendrycks (2:12:20) And it's not just an AI level intervention. It's also using AIs to help provide technologies that help the public their own understanding and things like that. So it's more constructive. It's not just, I think a lot of safety people think of it in restrictive ways that we got to just control the AI to do this and that. It's also, I think there's some benefits from trying to improve some diffuse societal factors in making this overall project go well. As far as giving AI specifically a truth objective, I think it would depend. My guess is there's a lot of details to fill in there. Maybe some version of that is safe, but I just don't even know what is truth. What theory of truth is it? Pragmatic theory of truth? Is it something else? I mean, these would have different consequences as a single objective. Elon said different sorts of things as well. He said, maybe it's actually net civilizational happiness. He said that on some different occasions or there's human autonomy. So it seems to be a mixture of different things you'd want in these sorts of systems to promote, and they can be promoted by either giving them that specific objective or using them in some sort of way to help with things like public epistemics and understanding. Some are more closed ended than than open ended and currently it's done in a more closed ended way.

Nathan Labenz (2:13:31) So we're recording, I think, the day after you just put out another result on AI powered forecasting. I haven't even had a chance to read that and and observe it yet. I know there's quite a bit of chatter online, but we did just do an episode with Dare, the new CEO of Metaculous. And so we we did run down kind of prior research on Mhmm. Powered forecasting. So what's the new result that you have contributed?

Dan Hendrycks (2:13:55) I think it's actually not really much of a new result because we didn't even really put up much of a paper. I just wanted to show relevant people a demo of look, they're forecasting bots that are very good. You could say they're, you know, maybe a 10,000 x, a 100 x, or a 100,000 x faster and cheaper than prediction markets. And then they can be in the same ballpark of accuracy, which should make them just a preferable option compared to asking a human and paying them a lot of money to to forecast something, you can just get an instant answer that like a relatively similar quality or maybe or in many cases, quality than a random experienced forecaster. Of course, are corner cases. If you ask it something that isn't even a question, it'll still answer. Those AIs also have some of those quirks and weird failure modes. But so it's largely to communicate. There's this sort of paper from Jacob's group, Jacob, my advisor in grad school, which was showed, said in their abstract, you know, we have an AI system that's approaching crowd level performance and in some cases exceeds it. I thought, wow, this is very big. People should start using this, and this has dramatic implications. But it didn't seem to catch up. I think most people forecasting weren't aware of it. And so now this is a sort of communications issue. I think these are not subhuman AI systems. They're actually very competitive for many types of questions. So then we just made a demo to try and communicate this more broadly. And then hopefully it will be integrated forecasting capabilities, create some interest in it, given that this is something that is within the realm of what AI systems can do, which wasn't the case some years ago when I think we may have done the first AI forecasting sort of paper at NeurIPS in 2022 or something. Models were terrible. Now they're really good with some various exceptions. So, yeah, it's largely just trying to get interested in that and maybe Anthropic could add such feature, maybe OpenAI could add such feature. So, yeah, largely just trying to increase attention to that, to increase the probability that it gets adopted as a sort of technology for improving public epistemics, because I think it's a variety of places to add those sorts of features, and that can be very helpful. But 1 of the motivations for it is that there's just a lot of things that's generally are uncertain, and people then aren't even aware of or don't even contemplate. So having some high quality forecast easily accessible, helps people appreciate some sort of weirder events down the road. If you ask it, what's the probability that OpenAI gets its weight stolen by China this decade? And some months, it's like 20%. Okay. That's you're gonna have to learn about info sec and things like that to some extent to actually get some sort of probability. It knows that. And I think that can be useful for just improving decision making and have us not walk into things that could have been easily avoided if there was a bit more expertise in the room. I suppose there's a classic example during COVID. What will COVID be next month, how many cases and then the President's advisors fit a cubic model to the curve and then forecast, oh, it's going away next month, and their model will show that it's negative than the month after or something of the number of cases. I think this sort of institutional decision making could be greatly helped if people have easily accessible, high competence, fast and broadly skilled forecasting tools. Think it's mainly some people really like forecasting as a hobby. And so this is getting them people's territory in that way. I think it's performance is a bit better than that sort of research paper that was published earlier this year, which I think was basically roughly crowd level in various circumstances, sometimes better, sometimes worse. As model is a little bit better than that, but then people would go, is it better? I know a forecaster who could probably beat this or something. So it's a little spurred discussions and make people aware of it. But, yeah, hopefully, it'll end up being integrated, which is the main purpose of it. And that's why so it's very unusual for me not to have a big paper with a lot of experimental analysis since I didn't include a lot of experimental analysis and a full write up. We seriously wrote up the technical report in, I think, maybe an hour or something like that just for some, you know, basic background information. And then people are like, what's going on? So under specified. Where are the details? Are you hiding something? It's just the demo. It's just trying to force this on your attention. That's it. This isn't doing anything too methodologically fresh or anything like that. There's an extensive write up from Huawei at all some months back

Nathan Labenz (2:18:16) for a fairly similar system. You mentioned this potential low hanging fruit in what a no regrets national competitiveness agenda might look like. I personally currently worry that we might end up having a lot of regrets about our national competitiveness agenda, and I'm interested in your take on it. Specifically, the thing that's in my craw right now, so to speak, is that I feel like decoupling between US and China or Western China when it comes to the general trajectory of AI research and development seems like a recipe for an arms race. And I feel like if we're on the same trajectory, that's at least 1 meaningful vector in which we could reduce that. We're both developing the same kind of technology. We both know what 1 another is dealing with. That could be good. In contrast, like, we cut off the chips. They have to go some other way. Maybe they might have to start thinking, and I'm reminded often of Samuel Hammond's 95 theses on AI. The 1 that is burned into my brain is RL based threat models have been discounted prematurely. And I think, geez, if I'm whatever party functionary in China and I'm like charged with staying competitive with the West on 20% of the compute budget or whatever, maybe I take an asymmetric approach And maybe that approach is, like, just far more reckless than the path that we seem to be on, which, at least for me, has been, like, surprisingly surprised on the upside in terms of its, like, friendliness to humans. I can have a remarkably ethical, sophisticated conversation with Claude. And I think there's a lot of other things that that might come out of a Chinese effort to just keep up with the West at any cost on a significantly reduced compute budget. So that's my worry. You can address my worry. You can raise your own worries. You can plant some seeds for what the no regrets national competitiveness agenda might look like.

Dan Hendrycks (2:20:07) Yeah. I don't know if I figured out a complete no regrets 1. I think there are some that are much higher regrets, such as, like, military steps in now and locks up all the sorts of AI projects and securitizes them and moves them to the desert or something. And then we very clearly signal we are in a huge race with you, China, and we will try and poach your people and and and this sort of stuff. I do think cooperation between The US and China is not very tractable unless there is some sort of catastrophe, or if there's very strong signs that there are AIs that are just trying to destroy us, and that it's a bigger threat than they are to each other. But absent that, and that will basically not be through convincing them of scenarios. Scenarios don't seem to particularly move our institutions, so it will need to be something actual. I think saying like international coordination is good, reducing competitive pressures is good, Reducing arms races is good. But I think maybe coordination looks more like a Western alliance as opposed to an inclusion of of China in that. So there are different ways you can do coordination. There's The US goes alone, or The US just things with Europe and NATO allies or 5 eyes, Canada and Australia and The UK and New Zealand and The US, or there is including China. But that the third 1 is, I think, just much less tractable. It won't be tractable for some while. So I think on the margin, it makes more sense to try and focus on other things or channel the energies of people's concerns about China's to more productive, lower regret type of options. 1 of which I haven't spoken with many people about, but I think occurred to me last week is just spending more on if if the government is to spend money on AI stuff, they're just saying, we need to support AI r and d. So what does that mean? Does that mean giving money to the labs, like OpenAI or the big AI companies? Instead, possibly that money could be spent on just subsidies for chip manufacturing here. There are lots of chip plants being built, and they're being built in different places, some of which are being built here, but they usually need subsidies to be built here. So if they're built here, that seems better from a robustness perspective. Because if China invades Taiwan, then TSMC becomes dysfunctional likely, either it's destroyed or the supply chain parts that go into it are not given to them. The West is not giving it to them. That would by default cause a global depression, possibly a great power conflict. And if compute is so relevant for AI capabilities, it seems important that The US not fall really far behind the possible strength of The US in a fast time or fast takeoff scenario is seems to be compute that would provide a lot of advantage or in short timelines, I should say, it provides a lot of advantage. And in long timelines, it provides a lot of advantage because long timelines, it's mainly like your economy versus their economy, and the economy will be in large part how many AI systems can you run and how quickly can they run. I think in in both scenarios, one's very bullish on AI or bearish on AI, but still thinks it's very salient from a national competitiveness standpoint, possibly focusing on chips and having more robustness to a relatively likely geopolitical catastrophe would be useful. I think forecasting, Germans give it around 30%, and I think the forecasting bot gets around 30% for this decade. And maybe it'll be higher than that if China views sees The US pulling ahead in AI, and this will give them a very dominating position and will really amplify their power relative to China's. Maybe rational for China, not saying it'd be good, but rational for China to invade Taiwan, do something they already wanted to do. There's even more reason to do it. But then that makes things a lot harder for The US and makes it more desperate, and that could get even more ugly. I think there are other sorts of interventions that I think are lower regret, like chip registries. I think adding some basic features onto chips that help verify whether they're in a country that's supposed to have them versus not could be useful. That just may be a bit more contentious. Like, if it's in Iran or North Korea, then maybe it shouldn't be functional. So geo fencing of some sort. But, yeah, I do agree that none of these are costless, but I am acting subject to the constraint that coordination with China isn't really possible unless there's something that looks like a catastrophe or a very convincing near miss scenario. And I think focusing on compute and robustness to some of these geopolitical events that are relatively likely seems like a possible way we could improve national resilience.

Nathan Labenz (2:24:37) Where does that put you on the chip ban today? I think there seems to be a general consensus or near consensus on building more chips at home would be good. Much different thing in my mind from cutting China off from buying from the international market, which we've currently done. If you believe the AGI in 2027, ASI soon after the western values must prevail argument, then you support the chip ban. If you think that's a lot of conjunctions in that argument and maybe it's gonna take longer, then maybe you don't support the chip ban. Is that how you think about it? And do you have a official position on the chip ban?

Dan Hendrycks (2:25:16) I know. I think I generally am in favor of export controls. There could be this unintended consequence, though, that it incentivized them very early on to build up chip independence. And if there's an invasion of Taiwan, then mainly the West falls behind and China can continue going ahead. That's a way it could have caused backfired as an intervention. I think it's a little unclear. But I think overall, though, I think that was a reasonable move that pays off well in short timelines, long timelines that suggest algorithm progress is even less. And so that suggests compute is the more essential thing. I don't think there would have it's not as though, if we didn't do export controls to be total coordination between The US and China on these issues. That's I don't think the case. Like, The US didn't want China going to the US UK AI Safety Summit, just even attending. Okay. And that's just a general thing. This isn't well, we don't like China on AI safety. That's not it. It's just they don't just don't like China. And this is very strong. And it's basically like negotiation ending to share things with them. And they currently have enough of a competitive advantage in compute and in talent that they are not particularly looking to bargain with them currently. There could be some other sorts of treaties like a verification regime for GPUs, there could be some angles for for coordination, but I think I seek to offset some of those damages from the expert controls through other means by maybe working on them with maybe working with their scientists somewhat more something like that to build at least goodwill between the scientific communities even more. But, yeah, I I I think overall, I think in many scenarios, the export controls were a reasonable intervention.

Nathan Labenz (2:27:01) Last question. You are the executive director of CAIS, the Center for AI Safety. You guys have a bunch of open roles on your website. I think people probably have a good sense of all the various things that you're involved with, and I assume many of those directions will remain live as you go forward. Pitch the opportunity to work at CAIS and give us a sense of what you are looking for in teammates.

Dan Hendrycks (2:27:24) There's a variety of different topics and we'll basically keep focusing on new things constantly. So if there's people wanting a variety of things to do in their work and identify opportunities for impact, to not feel committed to something once its impact has been made, then this is a good dynamic environment. I think that generally intelligence and conscientiousness and experience is the main sort of thing that we care about. It's not really too much to that. It's not looking for whether you believe particular things or something that really doesn't mind as long as you can work productively and get things done competently. And then of course, we'll work on research and field building and sort of advocacy and advising for a variety of things. We'll try and be competitiveness on each of those fronts in research and governance types of things. We'll try and make sure that there aren't organizations that are lapping us in any of those sorts of things. Anything AI safety related tend to work on at some point. Evals, engaging academics, policy, demos, software implementation.

Nathan Labenz (2:28:31) I think the risk statements. Yeah. Things we didn't even bring up. Just in brief, maybe, how did

Dan Hendrycks (2:28:38) you pull that off? Right.

Nathan Labenz (2:28:39) I think everybody knows, right, the extinction risk statement, 2 sentences signed by all the dams, Altman and the and similar, you know, people. Like, it was really a remarkable group that came together to sign that. Any tips for pulling off such a such an achievement?

Dan Hendrycks (2:28:54) I think the statement can be found at aistatement.com, for example. I think some of the main mechanisms were actually just modeling. Remember the good regulator theorem, which is if if you want to regulate a system, then you need to have a model of that system, like a very good 1. And I think that the main barrier for getting people to sign on to that was asking in a particular order. So I just generally have an interest in learning about people and where they're at and keeping track of that. It just seems useful and interesting in its own right. I just had to some extent a sense of who are the people who will sign on early without needing any of their friends? Who are people who are gonna need 2 or 3 of their friends to sign on? Who are people who are going to need 7 of their friends to sign on? And so basically proceeded in that order over the course of a month or so. If we just did something like blasted the email to everybody simultaneously, I think it would have completely failed. So that's, I think, the payoff of just having a model of these very interacting with these various stakeholders across time and getting a sense of where they're at on AI safety related things. So they're solving a collective action problem. In this case, required, I think, more of a social model.

Nathan Labenz (2:29:58) Who was last to sign? Just kidding. I know you

Dan Hendrycks (2:30:00) don't know. Think the poll came in. Right? Oh, 0, of of of some of the top signatory. Some people took a bit longer than I expected,

Nathan Labenz (2:30:09) but I won't say who. This has been fantastic. I really appreciate all the the time and the breadth of everything that we've discussed. Any closing thoughts or anything you wanna plug before we go?

Dan Hendrycks (2:30:19) Yeah, I guess you can follow me on Twitter. There's also a course I was mentioning complex systems and safety engineering, these sorts of and governance issues. So these are discussed in aisafetybook.com, and we'll run future versions of the course as well. Another thing is we have a newsletter, which would be newsletter.safe.ai that we put out every 2 weeks or so. We're trying to just help people be aware of what are the main developments in AI safety. So those are some possible ways to stay connected and learn more about these topics. Cool. Yeah. So thanks for having me.

Nathan Labenz (2:30:50) Yeah. Dan Hendrycks, executive director of the Center for AI Safety. Thank you for being part of the cognitive revolution. It is both energizing and enlightening to hear why people listen and learn what they value about the show. So please don't hesitate to reach out via email at tcr@turpentine.co, or you can DM me on the social media platform of your choice.

 Published in:
 Episode

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
