# Historic AI Developments & the Emerging Shape of Superintelligence, from Consistently Candid Podcast
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/historic-ai-developments-the-emerging-shape-of-superintelligence-from-consistently-candid-podcast/
# Date: 2025-03-08
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

Host: (0:00) I suspect that in the zoomed out history, this might appear to be a critical threshold. Everybody was scaling these base models, then somebody figured out that you could also scale inference compute. And then it became clear that it's actually pretty easy to do that. And then what's that going to produce? It seems to me that it's likely to produce a lot of weird AIs, because reinforcement learning also famously gives rise to strange behavior. It just seems like governance gets a lot harder in this world where distributed training works and where the post-training that really shapes the AI's behavior and practical utility and how they're going to show up in the world has actually become quite cheap. A race to powerful AGI between the US and China is one of the worst situations I can imagine that could lead to catastrophic outcome. I would say math and coding in particular are almost undoubtedly going to hit superhuman levels in the next, probably 2025. Certainly, it seems like by 2026.

Nathan Labenz: (1:03) Hello, and welcome back to the Cognitive Revolution. Today, I'm pleased to share a cross-post of my appearance on Consistently Candid with host Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse. This was my second episode with Sarah. Nine months ago, she was just getting into AI and still making sense of the fundamentals. Today, as you'll hear, she's developed a strong sense for which AI stories really matter and also does an excellent job of summarizing notable research results. Together, we unpack a number of stories that I believe history will judge to be among the most important of the last nine months. We start with the recent revelation that reinforcement learning can be relatively easily applied to sufficiently powerful base language models and the reasoning capabilities that this has unlocked. We then move on to consider the rise of distributed training, which, especially as combined with the inference-heavy nature of reinforcement learning, makes it possible for all sorts of moderately resourced organizations and distributed groups to apply reinforcement learning to any objective they might like. We also discussed the shift in rhetoric among American AI leaders toward embracing an AI arms race with China and get into a couple important recent AI alignment results, including the alignment faking paper that we covered in-depth in our episode with Ryan Greenblatt and also the very viral emergent misalignment paper from Elian Evans' group, to which I made a minor contribution and on which I was honored to be included as a co-author. Perhaps most interesting for regular listeners, for the first time publicly, I offer a sketch of the form that I expect early superintelligence to take in the base case over the next few years. The upside is that AI systems' ability to develop intuitive physics across many different problem spaces, like material science, protein folding, cell biology, and many, many more, especially as combined with reasoning abilities, suggests a pretty clear path to an exponentially growing number of eureka moments from AI systems, which really could accelerate science to the point that we achieve a century's worth of progress in just the next few years. At the same time, on the downside, our still nascent understanding of how these systems work, the rate at which we continue to be surprised by their outputs, and the growing body of evidence suggesting that frontier models are increasingly willing to deceive and otherwise scheme against their human users to achieve their own goals and protect their own values, all suggest that we will see lots of instances of bad behavior and will need to invest heavily in control measures along the way. This vision of superintelligence and also the vision of drop-in AI knowledge workers that I sketch out toward the end are inherently more forward looking and speculative than my usual material. And as such, I really want your feedback on this episode in particular. Thanks to your consistent engagement with the feed, I'm getting more and more invitations to speak to business and general audiences about AI. And this picture of superintelligence, which I hope makes the potential for frontier discovery tangible and the reality of bad behavior plain, is becoming a consistent framing for my talks. So what do you think? Am I missing something? Am I overstating any of the achievements or the possible benefits? Or perhaps understating any of the demonstrated issues? I really want to make sure that I'm sharing the most accurate and up-to-date understanding that I possibly can. So please do let me know if you think I'm getting anything wrong. With that, I hope you enjoy this review of the most important AI stories of recent months and this possible preview of the future of AI transformation from the Consistently Candid podcast with Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse.

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (4:34) Welcome back to Consistently Candid. I am back with Nathan Labenz. We last spoke maybe 10 months ago. I'm not sure. It's been a while, and a lot has happened since then. So I wanted to get your take on the state of play and recap some of the biggest AI things that have happened in the last year or so. Maybe if you just tell me, since the last time we spoke, what have been your biggest positive and negative updates? And are you feeling better or worse about AI than you were about 10 months ago?

Nathan Labenz: (5:06) Yeah. Last time I gave the case for cautious optimism. That's how I summarized it. Certainly, a lot has gone on. If I try to zoom out and abstract away from a lot of the details, I think one of the biggest developments has been the recent revelation that reinforcement learning on top of at least sufficiently powerful base language models really works and is actually pretty simple. It can be a pretty simple setup that works remarkably well and certainly has been proven by a lot of different groups at this point, with OpenAI giving an existence proof that such a thing was possible, and then DeepSeek and Kimi out of China giving specific implementation details showing how they did it, and then lots of other academic groups and other groups doing their own versions. It does seem that at least for a decent class of reasoning problems—math problems canonically and programming challenge type things where there are easy to verify answers—at least in those domains, it seems like you can push a sufficiently strong base model quite far down this reasoning path without needing a super complicated setup, without needing a ton of inference compute, and even without needing a super specific formula. Multiple different recipes or strategies for doing this all seem to be working. And I suspect that's going to also translate to a lot of other things. So I think we're just entering this era. How well it translates to things where there's not a clear ground truth or where beauty's in the eye of the beholder, so to speak, is going to be interesting to watch. But I do think there are a lot of things that you can create a good enough metric for to give a pretty good reward signal to a model. And I expect that we're just going to see a lot of that applied increasingly in the wild. It's even the kind of thing that communities can do without needing huge compute resources to do it. And so I suspect that in the zoomed out history, this might appear to be a critical threshold. Everybody was scaling these base models, then somebody figured out you could also scale inference compute. And then it became clear that it's actually pretty easy to do that and that a lot of different groups, organizations, companies can do it without totally having to go all in financially or break the bank. And then what's that going to produce? It seems to me that it's likely to produce a lot of weird AIs, because reinforcement learning also famously gives rise to strange behavior. It gives rise to phenomena like reward hacking. If you don't get your reward signal just right, then you have the chance of getting reward hacked. And it also just gives rise to inscrutable behaviors. We had seen specifically DeepSeek reported that they trained a model purely with reinforcement learning, and it was acting super weird in its chain of thought. I haven't observed that personally, actually. To be clear, I'm not sure quite how weird it was, but they reported language switching, and we have seen that from other models. I've also seen that from Grok 3 in the last couple weeks or the last couple days. So how weird do they behave? How inscrutable do they become? And how much do they surprise us? It's always been reinforcement learning that has taken things into the superhuman level of performance, classically with game playing type things. You could train a Go playing AI on human games of Go, and you'd probably top out around the human level of Go playing. It was when they had them playing each other and just rewarding them for winning that all of a sudden you have these systems zoom past human level. So reinforcement learning, self-play, the weirdness that can come of that, and the potentially surprising and likely in many domains superhuman capabilities that we're going to see out of that paradigm seem like the big story that might prove to be a notable hinge moment in history. That's probably my number one candidate from the last year.

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (10:09) Okay. So what this implies is that it might just be pretty, or a lot easier and a lot cheaper than we thought to train these quite powerful general purpose models.

Nathan Labenz: (10:22) Yeah. And to shape them in post-training in any direction that you can give a reliable reward signal for. I think a lot has been made in terms of how cheap the base models are. I mean, they're extremely cheap if you just download an open source one off the Internet. So that phenomenon has continued. DeepSeek put their models out for all to download and use however they want. So it doesn't get any cheaper than that. I think it's been a little bit overstated, maybe moderately overstated in some quarters, how cheap the DeepSeek model was. That's been pretty well chewed on by the community at this point. The $6 million model or whatever—well, that's just, even in their own accounting, that's just the compute used for the single training run to create that model once they'd already done the experiments, not counting all the salaries, not counting the fixed cost investments, and so on and so forth. So I think it's still fair to say that it's not cheap to create a frontier base model and probably only going to get still more expensive. The leaders, I would say, would not say that we've moved from one scaling paradigm to another, but rather that we're now stacking scaling paradigms on top of one another. So they're going to do bigger base models, more at least higher compute base models, and this sort of post-training. What I expect will probably happen more in the wild is not so much that people—although distributed training also is another interesting candidate for a big story in the macro view because until now, it's always been thought that you've got to have these giant data centers to do this compute. There's no other way to do it. They've got to have super high interconnect, and without these very specialized setups in very concentrated physical locations, you just couldn't do it. And I think that is also pretty well now changed by the developments in distributed training, where basically people have figured out ways to just dramatically reduce the bandwidth overhead that is required. Why is this hard in the first place? You've got these giant models with billions of parameters. If you're running them in faraway places, and you're doing the training and you're collecting the gradients, which is the updates to the model at each training step, you also need to sync those gradients. And those gradients are as big as the model itself, because if you have in the DeepSeek case a 671 billion parameter model, the gradient itself, in at least naive form, is also 671 billion numbers. It's the 671 billion changes you're going to make to the 671 billion parameters. So if you calculate some changes over here and some changes over there in these disconnected compute environments, then you have the question of how do I sync those up and combine them so I can make one coherent update to my model? And that means you've got to send hundreds of gigabytes across, do the syncing, and then also redistribute hundreds of gigabytes back out to the places where you're running the compute. So that's been thought to be really hard, and that's why we need this super high interconnect. And that's even why export controls were at times focused on specifically this connectivity piece. And the thinking at one point in time was like, well, we can let China have the raw compute. They can do the inference. That's okay. We're not trying to stop their economy, but we just don't want them to train these super crazy models. And so maybe we can kind of have the best of both worlds, allow them to use stuff but not train at the frontier. And now it seems like basically, people have got clever about that. There are ways to sort of shortcut or stream. One of the latest publications out of Google is called streaming DeLoCo, which is like distributed location something training, whatever. I don't know what DeLoCo exactly stands for. But basically, they can now, with a smarter approach than just doing the update and having to wait for hundreds of gigabytes to travel, they can now stream these updates in a smart way, which basically means both you can do the distributed training and also that all these chips that we sold to China in the last couple years, even if they had these reduced interconnect properties, that's probably still going to work just fine for training. And because they'll be able to follow publications out of Google and use, of course, their own engineering prowess, which has proven to be very substantial, to work their way around that. So it does still take a lot of compute to train a powerful base model. It's not the kind of thing that just hobbyists can do. It is the kind of thing now that a well-organized but distributed group could potentially patch together the resources to do. Probably not at the real scale that the Western leaders are going to push as they go into hundreds of millions and potentially billions for single training runs, but definitely still enough to get to the place where they could, in theory, do a base model about today's frontier in a distributed way. And then we're just going back to the post-training behavior. That stuff is really quite cheap. And especially in these distributed paradigms, really anyone can post-train in a reinforcement learning way. Anyone's maybe a little bit too permissive of a declaration there, but you don't have to be a super well-resourced group to muster the kinds of compute that are used to do these post-training things. And that does unlock a lot. At inference time, you have another question of, okay, maybe you trained this thing, but do you actually have the capability to use it? And that's another area where differently resourced actors have very different propositions. Meta's talking about, I think, a $200 billion data center was the last thing that they uploaded for the Orion project. That's $500 billion, and Apple's talking about $500 billion more they're going to spend in the US to build more stuff here. So they believe that we are all going to want intelligence always on all the time, and there's almost going to be, in their minds, no limit to the amount of inference compute that's going to need to be spent. Distributed groups, presumably, will come together to do their training, and then it'll be on the individual actors themselves, whether it's individuals, small companies, whatever, to have their own inference infrastructure or to rent it out of the cloud. And then in China, they're going to have—as the restrictions get tighter, as we realize, jeez, our original plan didn't work, we've got to get even tighter on this—and so that actually might constrain their ability to diffuse the technology through their society. Even if it doesn't necessarily restrict them so much that they can't do frontier work, it might mean that just rank and file Chinese businesses and Chinese users maybe have a relatively AI-scarce environment compared to what it seems like we're headed for. So I guess bottom line there is distributed training is another decent candidate because it really shuffles the way the power dynamics were thought to be settling around who can do what. Doesn't entirely change them, because compute is still really important. But it does show that you don't need to necessarily have a trillion-dollar data center to train the mega AI. And that also means if you're playing out war game type scenarios, there's not going to be a trillion-dollar data center that you could disable and sort of disable the other side's capacity. It's going to be probably more like 50 twenty-million-dollar data centers or something. And can you really take out 50 different locations? Well, that's probably World War III. And if you take one or two offline with some sabotage or whatever, you're not moving the needle that much. It just seems like governance gets a lot harder in this world where distributed training works and where the post-training that really shapes the AI's behavior and practical utility and how they're going to show up in the world has actually become quite cheap.

Nathan Labenz: (19:07) In business, they say you can have better, cheaper, or faster, but you only get to pick two. But what if you could have all three at the same time? That's exactly what Cohere, Thomson Reuters, and Specialized Bikes have since they upgraded to the next generation of the cloud, Oracle Cloud Infrastructure. OCI is the blazing fast platform for your infrastructure, database, application development, and AI needs, where you can run any workload in a high availability, consistently high performance environment, and spend less than you would with other clouds. How is it faster? OCI's block storage gives you more operations per second. Cheaper? OCI costs up to 50% less for compute, 70% less for storage, and 80% less for networking. And better? In test after test, OCI customers report lower latency and higher bandwidth versus other clouds. This is the cloud built for AI and all of your biggest workloads. Right now, with zero commitment, try OCI for free. Head to oracle.com/cognitive. That's oracle.com/cognitive.

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (20:17) Yeah. So I guess I saw a lot of different takes floating around in the aftermath of the DeepSeek thing. Some people making the case that this means that export controls don't work, and then other people making the case that this in fact strengthens the case for export controls because maybe the controls that were already in place hadn't quite bitten when DeepSeek was trained. And in fact, I think Dario Amodei made a point on the China Talk podcast a few weeks ago. He was like, we just need to go really, really hard on this and maintain this strong US lead over China that will give us some leeway to slow down if we need to, et cetera. So did you agree with this claim that this only reinforces the need to go really hard on export controls?

Nathan Labenz: (21:03) There are parts of that analysis that I think are valid, but I'll first zoom out and say maybe a third candidate for the big story of the last year is that the US AI leaders seem to have done—well, two of three. If I want to say Sam Altman, Dario, and Demis, I'll consider them to be the three most influential AI leaders for obvious reasons. Two of the three have done a pretty remarkable flip relative to their earlier positions where you can go find video on the Internet of both Dario and Sam saying things like, "A race to powerful AGI between the US and China is one of the worst situations I can imagine that could lead to catastrophic outcome." That's a very close paraphrase of Dario 2017. And Sam, I think 2023, was like, people are way overconfident about China. I don't know about China. They don't know about China. We should really think about what we ought to be doing and not base our decisions on what China's going to do. And now they have both totally flipped on that. Sam has put op-eds out saying it's either their values or our values in the AI. There's no third way, which I don't like that framing. And I also don't like the Dario framing where he basically says, yeah, we've got to keep them down, build our lead, and then build an international alliance. And then one day, we can come around to them and make them an offer. And at that point, they'll be so clear that they're so outclassed by our AI prowess in part because we'll have denied them the chips to do the work that they'll just have to give up competing with democracies. I think that's a direct quote from one of his essays. And then we'll be nice, and we'll give them the benefit of our advanced development. And I don't like that stuff at all. Demis, to his credit, in my view, is taking a very different tone recently and calling for—

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (23:03) Yeah. And he's developed a strong stance on the AISC thing, which I think—

Nathan Labenz: (23:07) Yeah. Same. I think I'm starting my own journey on the US-China question. I don't know. I'm not an expert. I've never been to China. I don't speak any Chinese. I really don't know a lot about it. But I believed Dario 2017, and I believed Sam Altman 2023. And I'm like, if this is as powerful as you say it's going to be, then I don't know why they couldn't have just said—why does Dario have to come out and openly call for a race?

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (23:44) I guess—well, I don't know if you listened to this episode of him on China Talk, but—

Nathan Labenz: (23:50) Yeah.

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (23:50) Yeah. I guess the steel man of his case was like, well, if you're trying to maintain a lead over your adversary, one thing you could do is just massively accelerate yourself, and the other thing you could do is try to hold them back. And I guess he was saying that it's way worse to be in a neck-and-neck race because then everyone has to corner-cut on safety. Whereas if you're in a race with quite a wide differential, then that grants you some leeway to slow down yourself if you want to. If you have a year's lead over China, maybe you can do a little bit more safety work than if you had a month's lead over China. And I was like, well, this kind of makes sense. But then the part where he lost me was when he was like, well, you know, if we had really compelling evidence of the risk, maybe we could all agree to slow down. But then he kind of passed the buck to the safety community and was like, these people need to find the compelling evidence. And if they really want us to slow down, they need to demonstrate this. And I was thinking, but don't you have way better access to the evidence than anyone else, being the CEO of a frontier company? So I don't know. I thought the first part of the argument, I guess, I couldn't really find fault with. And then the second part, I was like, it does seem like if he really, really wanted to make a compelling case for this being risky, he probably could try a bit harder.

Nathan Labenz: (25:09) Yeah. Well, I think actually, to give credit where I think it is due, I think Anthropic continues to do a lot of work and some of the best work in terms of really engaging with the questions of what could go wrong and how are these AIs potentially going to surprise us and so on and so forth. I recently did an episode of the podcast with Ryan Greenblatt, who is the lead author of the alignment faking paper. And he doesn't even work at Anthropic. He works at Redwood Research, but came up with this idea and showed some initial results just by prompting the model and then went to Anthropic and said, hey, are you interested in this? And could we do a deeper collaboration? And they did. And they've got a lot of great stuff like that going on. They put out work about how training models on documents that describe reward hacking seems to induce reward hacking. They continue to do a lot of stuff on interpretability. Their model cards and their risk assessments continue to be the best.

Sarah Hastings-Woodhouse: (26:11) That doesn't imply we just delete one of the AI safety literature off the Internet or something. Host: (26:17) Well, at a minimum, there is probably filtering to be done. I do think that there's a growing gap between Anthropic, OpenAI, and DeepMind. All three of the leaders are doing a lot of good stuff and making a pretty good effort here to really understand the nature of what they're creating. Anthropic is doing a lot of good stuff. DeepMind just put out a paper about strategies to try to avoid reward hacking in reinforcement learning, and that strikes me as some of the most important recent research.

I do think the geopolitical strategy that Dario is articulating is really trying to thread a needle. And I just have so much uncertainty as to how well this will work. I think he should have a little more humility about just how well this can go. The conjunction fallacy seems to be very operative there potentially. We're going to do this and this and this and this and then this, and then finally that, and then we get to a good outcome.

I would love to see, especially somebody in his position, preserve a little more option value because, even if he would—I don't doubt that he's being sincere. But even believing everything that he's saying, these policies are already happening. So in terms of what role he should play, if I were his speechwriter or if I had been asked to comment on a couple of these essays, I would have said, why don't you stay out of geopolitics for at least now? Why don't you say, "Hey, I don't know what our overall strategies toward China should be. That's above my pay grade. I'm focused on developing frontier AI and doing it safely. And what I can say is we've got a lot of open questions and some really concerning initial results about where this is all going, such that at some point, we might really need to get on the same page with China. And I just hope we at least maintain some ability to do that if and when it becomes necessary."

He could have said that. The chip restrictions would have gone ahead. I don't think they would have reversed them on such a mild statement from Dario. And he would have, I think, preserved a lot more option value to come in later and say, "Remember when I said this before? It's really happening." As it is, it seems to me that we're projecting to China that our intention toward them is potentially regime change. And it's not like we haven't acted on that in the past. So I think they kind of have to take it seriously, and it does seem like it makes any sort of trust-building exercise a lot harder.

I also worry, by the way—and this has not happened yet, so this is in the speculative category. I do not count DeepSeek R1 as an example of this. But I do worry a bit about divergence of the tech trees. And I don't know how likely this is, but I do think the more common foundations we're each building on, the more ability we have to say, "Hey, we're seeing this. Are you seeing this? Or maybe you should look in your models for the same kind of thing we're seeing here because this looks quite problematic."

If we're working with basically the same technology on both sides of this divide, then those sorts of purely, "Hey, you might want to watch out for this" messages could be received, could be apt, could lead people in the right direction, and maybe it could bring people together at some point.

If, however, we're building on fundamentally different chips, leading to potentially different architectures, leading to different training strategies, leading to just maybe some kind of more general divergence, then they're not going to see the same stuff that we're going to see, or the way that we're looking for it isn't going to apply as much. And it's also just going to definitely reduce the ability to trust. Because, again, these things are not like missile silos you can see from space. We're going to see a lot of data centers in China. They're going to see a lot of data centers here. It's not going to be clear in what data centers what activity is happening or what breakthroughs have been achieved algorithmically or what capabilities or behaviors have been observed.

I think it is nice—again, I don't know that this will happen, but part of me is like, if we want to keep the Chinese AI ecosystem down, one way to do it would be to sort of use an export dumping strategy in a somewhat similar way that they've used to the West with solar panels. They have subsidized the development of the solar panel industry. They sell them super cheap. Our companies can't compete. That might be somewhat of a simplification, but that's my general understanding. And I would say maybe we should do that to them with AI. Give them as much free AI as they can so there's less demand and less of a feedback cycle in their own ecosystem. But their people can still get the benefit of all the stuff that we're doing. And anybody who wants to open source or tinker or whatever, they'll also be kind of using the same foundation that we're building on.

I guess we'll never know how that would work because I don't think we're going to run that experiment. And we might—I hope we don't, but I am a little worried that we might end up in a spot where the technology diverges so much that it becomes—and it becomes more secret over time too. So it's like, we can't tell you exactly what we're doing. We don't even know what you're doing. How are we going to have any sort of meeting of the minds if that gulf really gets too wide? So, yeah, there's a third candidate for biggest story of last year.

S2: (32:13) I always think that I've found all of the things to worry about, and then that's not physically anything to worry about. That was a good point.

Host: (32:21) Hey, we'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

Nathan Labenz: (32:26) Being an entrepreneur, I can say from personal experience, can be an intimidating and at times lonely experience. There are so many jobs to be done and often nobody to turn to when things go wrong. That's just one of many reasons that founders absolutely must choose their technology platforms carefully. Pick the right one and the technology can play important roles for you. Pick the wrong one and you might find yourself fighting fires alone.

In the ecommerce space, of course, there's never been a better platform than Shopify. Shopify is the commerce platform behind millions of businesses around the world and 10% of all ecommerce in the United States, from household names like Mattel and Gymshark to brands just getting started. With hundreds of ready-to-use templates, Shopify helps you build a beautiful online store to match your brand's style, just as if you had your own design studio. With helpful AI tools that write product descriptions, page headlines, and even enhance your product photography, it's like you have your own content team. And with the ability to easily create email and social media campaigns, you can reach your customers wherever they're scrolling or strolling, just as if you had a full marketing department behind you.

Best yet, Shopify is your commerce expert with world-class expertise in everything from managing inventory to international shipping to processing returns and beyond. If you're ready to sell, you're ready for Shopify. Turn your big business idea into cha-ching with Shopify on your side. Sign up for your $1 per month trial and start selling today at shopify.com/cognitive. Visit shopify.com/cognitive. Once more, that's shopify.com/cognitive.

Nathan Labenz: (34:22) It is an interesting time for business. Tariff and trade policies are dynamic, supply chains squeezed, and cash flow tighter than ever. If your business can't adapt in real time, you are in a world of hurt. You need total visibility from global shipments to tariff impacts to real-time cash flow, and that's NetSuite by Oracle, your AI-powered business management suite trusted by over 42,000 businesses.

NetSuite is the number one cloud ERP for many reasons. It brings accounting, financial management, inventory, and HR all together into one suite. That gives you one source of truth, giving you visibility and the control you need to make quick decisions. And with real-time forecasting, you're peering into the future with actionable data. Plus with AI embedded throughout, you can automate a lot of those everyday tasks, letting your teams stay strategic. NetSuite helps you know what's stuck, what it's costing you, and how to pivot fast. Because in the AI era, there is nothing more important than speed of execution. It's one system, giving you full control and the ability to tame the chaos. That is NetSuite by Oracle.

If your revenues are at least in the seven figures, download the free ebook, Navigating Global Trade: 3 Insights for Leaders at netsuite.com/cognitive. That's netsuite.com/cognitive.

S2: (35:47) Yeah. Okay. Maybe we should just run through what I think are the biggest stories of the last year or so, and you can give me your take on them or maybe try to explain them in sort of layman's terms. So let me think. Well, I guess the first thing would just be this sort of switch into the reasoning paradigm with first O1 and then O3 and whatever comes next. Can you explain in the simplest way possible what is the difference between a model like GPT-4 and a model like O1, and what does the difference sort of imply for AI progress in general?

Host: (36:29) I think there probably ultimately is sort of a spectrum here, and maybe also a potentially important role with certain threshold effects. But even prior to the reasoning models coming online, one of the biggest observations that has driven a lot of the performance in practical terms of the AIs over the last couple years, basically since GPT-3, I would say, is the chain of thought. Couple years ago, you could put out an academic paper by literally just taking a prompt and then putting "let's think step by step" at the end of the prompt, and then testing that against minor variations of those instructions. And "let's think step by step" would perform 1% better than this other rephrase, and that was a paper. But that was a really powerful observation, and people got a lot of improved reliability and improved consistency of behavior from models just by applying that paradigm, even to the models as they previously were.

It became sort of a default behavior too by the time of GPT-4. It would mostly give you a chain of thought even if you didn't ask for it. And actually, I saw a lot of research initially underestimating how powerful GPT-4 was because people would prompt it in a way that would prevent it from doing the chain of thought in the way that it normally would. So I've been on my own micro crusade to educate people about the fact that establishing your own chain of thought and teaching the model to do the chain of thought in the way that you want it to be done is one of the biggest practical unlocks for just AI automation, application development, you name it.

A lot of people don't have that, so that's actually kind of challenging for a lot of people. They often have inputs and outputs, but they've got no documentation of the chain of thought that they used, because it's just in their head, to translate those inputs to outputs. So developing the sort of ability to get that down on paper is—if you're in a team context, get together as a team and have a meeting of the minds and agree, "Yes, this is how we want this task to be done." Not just that the outputs are good, but that the way in which we're showing the AI how to think about it is the right way that we want somebody to think about this. That's been a lot of work at the implementation level, and that work continues on.

And basically, what they did with the reasoning models is they just took that to another level. Why it has taken this long actually is kind of a mystery, and I don't think we have the final answer on this yet. In one paper, DeepSeek said that they tried their reinforcement learning paradigm on smaller models, and it didn't work. And so that sort of suggested that maybe you need sufficiently large or sufficiently powerful base models in order to be able to do this sort of reasoning training process.

And the thinking there would be something like, the pretraining process is next token prediction. And so what are you going to learn to predict the next token of vast scale Internet data? I did one of my favorite episodes that I ever did on the Cognitive Revolution with the authors of a paper called Tiny Stories out of Microsoft, where they basically used GPT-4 to create these stories that were sort of three-year-old simplicity, three-year-old vocabulary level, and then they trained language models just on those. And they observed, what is the natural progression of learning for a language model?

It's like, first, just getting basic syntax correct. Getting the right part of speech next is kind of one of the big things you've got to do if you want to be an accurate next token predictor. And then it's like recalling previous tokens because once a token appears once, it's more likely to appear again. So just learning that whatever token came before, I should be potentially upweighting that. And in their little study, they basically got as far as just the very beginning of reasoning microskills.

One of the examples that they showed was late in their training process, and this was all small-scale stuff, but after the syntax and after vocabulary and after repetition, eventually they got to negation. And they showed an example where it was like, "Sally didn't like—Jim made soup, but Sally didn't like soup. So Jim gave Sally blank." And at some point, it would just say soup again because you already had soup twice, and when things appear, they tend to reappear. So that's kind of the naive next token prediction. You have to understand this negation concept to realize that it's got to be something else besides soup. It's in fact the least likely thing that should appear there, but you need to have this microskill kind of grokked in order to understand that situation and make the right next prediction.

And the behaviors that we're seeing out of these advanced reasoning models now are like double-checking, going back to the beginning and trying a different approach. It's this very higher-order behavior that doesn't necessarily appear a ton on the web because people are not in the habit of live journaling their problem-solving processes at this level of detail. And also, just as very high up the hierarchy of things that you need to be an effective next token predictor. You've got to learn an awful lot of stuff, like all this world knowledge, all this stuff before you finally start to have these very high-order macro reasoning behaviors.

So possibly, they weren't in base models until recently. Possibly they weren't in the training data. Another thing that is happening is people are synthesizing a lot more data and putting that out there. So it is showing up on the web more today. But I don't think this has been fully answered.

It has been shown that once you—I guess a couple things have been shown. One is the reasoning traces just naturally get longer. If you give the model a reinforcement signal like "you were correct" or "you're not correct," it can be as simple as that. That was one of the things from the DeepSeek paper. It's so simple. There's nothing like—it's just like, did you get it right, or did you get it wrong? That is the signal. So with that simple signal, the reasoning traces just naturally expand. And that seems to be sort of a natural attractor. Given the opportunity, given this sort of signal, they will learn to think longer on their own. And then what patterns of thinking come out of that—maybe you needed a particularly powerful base model to have some hope of ever seeing that behavior so that you could reward it.

There's a big problem in reinforcement learning generally, the sparse reward problem, which is like, if you can't make any traction on the problem at all, then there's nothing to reward. And so the model can't update in the right direction because it's not getting any signal about what the right direction is. But if you can just get over that hump a little bit and you can start to get some signal, then you can kind of catch the wave. And so that seems to have happened.

With these advanced reasoning model trajectories, you can distill that down to smaller models, meaning you can teach the models to follow the same patterns. And other groups seemingly have managed to apply the reinforcement learning to smaller models. So why exactly it's taken this long is not super clear. But basically, that's what they're doing. They're doing a lot more tokens. It's a long chain of thought. They're starting to demonstrate these higher-order reasoning things, including double-checking. You see these sorts of—in the DeepSeek paper famously, the model said, "That's an aha moment." And it's sort of this kind of inner monologue where it's kind of weaving its way around and trying to come at it from different angles and starting over if it gets stuck and double-checking. And it's honestly pretty familiar. When you read the chains of thought, you're like, "Yeah, I get it." It doesn't feel super alien.

Of course, those are the chains of thought that have been also kind of sculpted with some human examples to try to get them to be more nicely behaved. The ones that are just pure reinforcement learning without human examples reportedly are weird and hard to read and sometimes switch languages, yada yada yada. So yeah, I think that's it. It's fundamentally the same architecture. It's still doing next token prediction. It's just generating a lot more tokens and demonstrating these higher-order reasoning behaviors on its way to answers.

I heard somebody say a while back—I think this was on the Dwarkesh podcast—it's like, token by token, GPT-4 feels plenty smart. In some ways, it feels as smart as me, but it just doesn't—it's sometimes too quick to answer or it's too satisfied with its first guess. And that problem now basically seems to be solved where it'll actually kind of do the labor of approaching the problem in enough different ways that it is much more likely to reach the right outcome.

S2: (46:36) Yeah. Am I right thinking that it's basically that more of the compute budget is used at the point where you ask the question as opposed to during the training? And so that's what it's doing when it's thinking for longer or something?

Host: (46:54) Yeah. Yes. I think that's right. I mean, again, why not both is also the attitude of the leading developers. They're both going to build bigger base models that will be smarter on a token-by-token basis, and they're going to train them to think longer. So it's not that you can't have both, but you can also have now kind of all combinations. You can have a small model that's trained to think longer. You can have a big model that isn't trained to think longer. You can be anywhere on that matrix.

It is a little bit speculative, but one way I think about this is just—and again, I think this will blur and we'll kind of later have a better sense, and it'll ultimately look like more of a spectrum. But with that caveat, I roughly think that the pretraining stage—because that is still where the vast majority of the compute is going—seems to determine what sort of concepts the model can represent internally. And then how long it runs at runtime is like how many of those different possible concepts it actually does use in the attempt to solve a particular problem.

So I think it is probably fair to say that, certainly, if you went and took GPT-2, at that time, I would say the stochastic parrot description is probably decent. It did have some higher-order things. Even going back to 2017, they saw—there have been a couple of famous quotes and interviews where they recount this story where they saw the sentiment neuron, where they were training a language model to predict the next token in Amazon reviews. And they observed there was this sentiment neuron that was indicating positive or negative sentiment. And not only was it indicating that, but it was actually a more accurate classifier of the sentiment of the review than purpose-built sentiment classifiers, which existed at the time.

They were like, "Wow, this is crazy. We didn't train this thing with the objective of learning sentiment, but yet in the course of just training it to predict the next token, it has learned this higher-order concept even better than models that were specifically trained to do that." So we do have, at least some higher-order concepts, in these early models, and GPT-2, I'm sure, had some. But it was just not that big, not that many higher-order concepts. You probably could have GPT-2 think forever, and just certain things are going to be fundamentally beyond its capability because it just doesn't have the right abstractions to work with.

And so you can kind of push performance in multiple ways. You can give it more and more advanced abstractions to work with, and that mostly, I think, happens through the pretraining process and just the raw scale of it all. And then you can also train it behaviorally to do this longer chain of thought and use more and more different abstractions at runtime. And that just dramatically increases the chances it's going to hit on the right ones to ultimately do the thing effectively. So I don't—I get that you can have both. You can have any combination of those. But I would say we should—I don't think it means that the end of pretraining scaling is here either. They're going to keep jamming on that.

Grok 3 is the first publicly known model that is publicly known to have been trained on greater than the Biden executive order 10 to the 26 FLOPS. And I'm sure it's probably not the only one. I'm sure OpenAI's got one cooking, if not already at some phase of testing and probably Anthropic too. So they're not stopping the general scale-up. It's just that now we have kind of two dimensions to push on.

S2: (51:09) Yeah. Makes sense. Yeah. So we had O1, the first of these reasoning models. If I'm remembering correctly, that came out in like September. And then literally in December, we had O3, although I think the actual gap was bigger than that because I think they sort of announced O3 and all the benchmarks and stuff before they'd actually done the safety testing. Whereas with O1, they did the safety testing first, and it looked like it was a smaller gap than it probably was. Maybe it was more like six months than three months, but still not a long time. And yeah, everyone freaked out about O3. We saw these crazy improvements.

I think there are two that people kind of were most either excited or alarmed by, depending on what side of this issue you're on. One was the ARC-AGI results, which went from like 20% to like 80-something. And then this Frontier Math benchmark, which O3 got like 25% or something. So yeah, I'm interested in—I think the ARC-AGI one was the most surprising. It caught everyone off guard, including the guy who had designed ARC-AGI, who I didn't think was expecting this to be solved for many years. And yeah, for people who don't know, it's very simple sort of pattern-matching task. It's very, very easy for people and, for some reason, has been very hard for AIs thus far. So like, yeah, what do you think explains such a crazy improvement between O1 and O3 on the ARC challenge and how significant is this?

Host: (52:41) I think it's just a lot more reinforcement learning. I mean, I think that—and it's not just to say that people are working hard, and there's lots of little problems, I'm sure, to be solved along the way, yada yada yada. But again, if you try to zoom out and—also, they're not telling us all the techniques. So there's room for doubt certainly in this analysis. But the basic message that they've been sending is they've got this recipe figured out. The reinforcement learning is working, and just keep doing more of it. And you get—as long as you can continue to get better signal, you're now entering into this sort of self-play thing where there's no telling how far it can go.

And certainly in some domains, it seems almost certain at this point to get to superhuman abilities. I would say math and coding in particular are almost undoubtedly going to hit superhuman levels in the next probably 2025. Certainly, it seems like by 2026. I can't imagine how that doesn't happen given the trajectory that they're on. And the fact that you can throw arbitrarily hard problems at it, and as long as you can create a—as long as there's a gradient for it to climb. As long as the problems have some ability for them to get it right sometime so it can get some signal that you can reward, as long as you can kind of maintain this hill for it to climb, then they're going to climb these hills.

So it might in fact be a relatively simple story from O1 to O3, and the relatively short timeline does suggest that too. It does also suggest that they're feeling more competitive pressure, and Sam Altman specifically said in the wake of DeepSeek that we're going to pull forward a couple of our releases. And so it does seem like they're willing to—I don't know about necessarily cut some corners might be a little bit strong, although there have been some things where it did kind of look honestly like there was a little bit of corner-cutting. Some of the system card safety reports were like, "Wait. Is this the model that you actually—are you reporting data for a different model than the one you actually released, or what's going on here?"

S2: (54:59) And they're like, "Yeah. Well, you—"Host: (55:00) We were expecting a cleaner account of what was going on. And then, of course, we got Grok, and just total chaos over there. So they are feeling, I think, these pressures. There are probably multiple reasons for that window seeming kind of short. But yeah, I think one good reason is just more application of the same technique is continuing to work. And Sam Altman also said not too long ago, at the time of the o3 initial announcement, they had said it had reached the top 200 positions in the world on competitive coding challenges. And more recently, but it's already a couple weeks back, only six to eight weeks between the o3 announcement and this follow-up statement, he said it had climbed up to number 50 in the world. So it is, you know, and again, it's probably not like, did they have to invent a new paradigm to go from top 200 to top 50? I don't think so. I think they're just, it's sort of this enrichment process where the better it gets, the harder problems it can solve. And as long as you can give it a reward signal on those problems, up the hill it climbs. And that hill is taller than what humans have ascended to ourselves. So that's why I see little room to doubt that we will get superhuman math and coding at least. And then how much that generalizes, how many clever ways they can come up with to create the signals in other domains, that's more speculative.

S2: (56:44) Yeah. It's a strange phenomenon that I noticed, and I don't know whether you feel the same way. But in the wake of o3, before that, people would talk about how long until we get AGI. Right? And then o3 happened, and I just started to see people talking about this a lot less using this term AGI. A lot of people are using the term superintelligence, which was meant to be the thing that comes after AGI. And I was kind of like, oh, do we, I think I tweeted about this at some point. I was like, did we stop talking about AGI? And François Chollet, who was the guy that created the ARC test, was kind of saying, well, actually, ARC AGI was never meant to be a test for AGI. It doesn't, if someone, if a model gets human level performance on the ARC test, doesn't mean we have AGI. It's kind of necessary but not sufficient or whatever. And he was saying, you know, as long as there are still things that are trivially easy for humans but hard for models, we still don't have AGI, and this is still the case. And other people were kind of pushing back and saying, well, AIs just have different capability profiles to humans. And maybe this will always be true. And maybe the only thing that really matters is can AIs massively speed up AI development? And it seems like you could get to that threshold without having something which is generally capable as humans across all the domains that we're capable at, which is something you might call AGI. So this is only thing that maybe AGI is a term with kind of a misnomer, and that we should stop talking about that because the thing we care about is getting to this kind of automated AI R&D threshold. And there was another study that came out, I think, I can't even remember if it was before or after o3 now. It's all getting scrambled in my brain. But from METR, when they were looking at how good is AI at these sort of AI R&D tasks, which I think are based on the work tests that they would give people who were applying to Anthropic or OpenAI or something, and they found that they were pretty competitive with people over these shorter time horizons, I think, like two hours or something, and then just not as competitive over eight hour time horizons, which doesn't seem like that much of a difficult sense to jump. So, yeah, what do you think about this? Have you noticed this vibe shift away from talking about AGI too? And do you think that AGI is still a useful term, or should we kind of abandon that and just think about this automated R&D threshold and then whatever comes after that?

Host: (59:12) You know, I would say I've noticed it too. And I think it's probably just a matter of, it's now getting to the point where you can sort of envision what these things are going to look like. And so it's less of a pure abstraction or sort of distant, dreamy, super fuzzy thing, and now it's kind of increasingly like, jeez, I can kind of imagine what early superintelligence would look like. And yeah, it might still have some relative weaknesses. But I do think, you know, this was true of the original Turing test too, right? The original Turing test was formulated by, obviously, a historical genius, but with very low information and turned out to not really be what we wanted. And in fact, even worse than that was kind of fundamentally flawed in the sense that there's sort of a deception notion built into the test. Right? The test is like, if you can perform in a human-like way enough so that the person can't tell what's the human and what's the AI, then we count you as intelligent. I would say today, we've long since passed the capabilities required to pass the Turing test. And to the degree that we haven't actually demonstrably done that, it's because the AIs behave differently. Because the behavior we want from the AI is actually not to confuse us for a person, but to be more helpful in other ways than people are helpful. So, actually, if you wanted to take an AI and train it to pass the Turing test, the first thing you should do is have it say, I don't know a lot. Like, I've never heard of that before. These sorts of responses would be very common from people and are hard to distinguish from people, but are not actually helpful if you're paying $20 or $200 a month for AI assistance. So I think,

S2: (1:01:15) Yeah, we should not be trying

Host: (1:01:17) to build something that's better than us on every dimension. That seems like a very, you know, that seems like a bad idea. What we care about is, yes, potentially, we definitely care about hitting the threshold of AI doing its own R&D. You know, more broadly, we care about economic growth and abundance and having our day-to-day needs met in an effective way. And so I do think it's good to reframe what kind of AI could do that, you know, ideally without having strict dominance over us on every possible dimension. And my strong suspicion is that there are some things that they don't need, especially at a system level, to be able to really deliver for us in the ways that count, that make lives better. I don't think they need to be better than us at every single possible thing in order to do that. So if we are a little more strategic and a little bit more focused on what we actually want and a little bit more mindful of what's the sort of way that we can get there with a system that is hopefully more manageable rather than less, that does seem to be, to me, a very good reframing. I do actually have a sketch of, and I'm kind of developing this right now, but a sketch of what early superintelligence looks like in my mind is, I don't want to say is, at a minimum would be. You know, I think there's plenty of room for more surprises here. But if you take a sort of o3 level model that is possibly the best in the world at math already, but if not, it's super elite. Like, I'm not sure how many of the authors that contributed the FrontierMath problems could themselves score 25% on the test. That would be very interesting to find out. I don't think anybody knows. But it's possible that you can already get the highest possible score of any intelligent entity, human or AI, from o3 on this test. So that's high. Like, that's high reasoning ability. If you take that and you integrate it in some way with all of the specialist AIs that are popping up across a huge number of different domains, where they seem to be developing what I'm calling an intuitive physics in these different domains, then I think you will have a superintelligence. The intuitive physics concept is really important because one of the debates that people, I know there's been this sort of gradual retreat of, well, they're just stochastic parrots. They don't have any higher order concepts. Well, they have higher order concepts, they can't reason. Well, they can reason, but they'll never discover new knowledge. Well, they're discovering some new knowledge, but they still can't run total circles around us because, you know, the world is complicated, and they can't simulate everything. And that's sort of a Wolfram sort of idea. There's computational irreducibility. There's no way to predict the future or have these insights without actually just doing a lot of computation, calculation, simulation type work. I had a debate about this with Martin Casado from a16z that are part of a year ago now. And I want to revisit that because since then, we've had a lot of models come online that seem to have an intuitive physics in a lot of different problem spaces. And what I mean by intuitive physics is like, somebody throws a ball to you, you know, you're not calculating all the forces on that thing and every molecule in the air that it's going to bounce off of between its origin and how it's going to get to you. You just kind of know where it's going, and you can kind of react to that without doing this explicit calculation. And in the same way, we now have a lot of proof points that AIs can do this too. When I recently did an episode with a couple guys from Orbital Materials, which is a AI for material science company, and they collect training data from, I think this is the clearest example of this, from molecular dynamic simulations. And that is the full brute force calculation. You know, every single little, I think they work in intervals of like 10 to the minus 15 seconds. And every 10 to the minus 15 seconds, you have to do this crazy calculation that is all the forces acting on all the other atoms and whatever. And then you can increment by this tiny thing, and then you have to do it again. And it's extremely, extremely expensive to do this sort of simulation. But then when they gather all this simulation data and have all these trajectories of how these systems evolve, then they train an AI on it. The resulting AI runs orders of magnitude faster and no less accurate than the original simulation process. So I kind of view that as a clear sign that they don't need to do all the calculation. You know, they may need to have it done for them once in order to learn from it. But then at runtime, you know, they're just dramatically faster. So they're doing things now that were previously impossible at this company, including, by far, the most large-scale simulations of collections of atoms. They showed up, you know, it's not ground truth proven out yet, but they shed some real light on, let's say, the mechanism of the potassium ion channel where there's been competing hypotheses for exactly how this thing works. And they put it in simulation and observed one of the hypotheses appears to be correct according to their simulation, and this was just not possible before because you just couldn't simulate at that scale. But because this thing runs orders of magnitude faster, now they can simulate this scale. So that's happening across all these different things. You've got it in material science. You've got it in biology from AlphaFold. You know, but now we're on AlphaFold 3. And it's not just the shape of one protein, but it's how proteins bind together and how they bind with small molecules. And some models even have the metallic ions that can be at the center of these clusters of complexes they're called. And so that just, you know, and then we're also seeing it in the evolution of cells. I've got an episode coming up next week with the author of a paper where they take transcriptome sequences, transcriptome being what genes are being expressed in a cell at any given time, and they're now predicting the next transcriptome time step. So how is the cell, and that's getting close to a full cell model. So, you know, whether it's happening in weather, Google even put out one about optimizing shipping for international shipping companies. And they said that they could double the profitability of a shipping company, delivering 15% more containers with 13% fewer trips. And it's not like they haven't been working on optimizing this, right? So all these different things, you've got this sort of intuitive physics kind of coming online. Now if you can put an o3 class reasoning model at the center of this, maybe it's using those things as tools. You know, they're getting quite good at just calling functions. So we have seen some examples of this where a project called the Virtual Lab, and my whole life is podcast episodes, so I keep referring back to these different episodes. But I talked to one of the lead authors, James Zou, who's a professor at Stanford about this. And they had given the AI, the language model AI, access to some of these different specialist narrow models that predict the shapes and predict what will bind with what or whatever. And they used that system where the AI was using these other models as tools to create a bunch of candidate nanobodies with the goal of treating new COVID variants while still being effective against the original variants. And, apparently, they, it actually came up with, first of all, that strategy itself apparently is unconventional, because you would usually use antibodies, and it used nanobodies. And so that's one interesting fork, you know, that the AI system took. But then it actually apparently did generate candidate antibodies that apparently work and were experimentally validated in the real world. So it could be like this tool use paradigm or potentially even it could be sort of an integrated latent space where the same set of weights or, you know, the same integrated system has not only its abstractions learned from language, but also these abstractions learned from these other domains. And we just don't have those abstractions in our brain, certainly not in an intuitive way. But we have seen precedent for this, right? Rewind two years, and you did not have vision language models like you have today. You had language models, which are obviously not nearly as good as ones we had today. And then separately, you would have these computer vision models that could sometimes caption something or whatever, but they weren't really integrated. And now, you know, the latest models are seeing very well. Thank you very much. You know, I mean, they still don't have as good of a perception, I would say, as we do, but they can do sophisticated scene understanding for sure. And it has been shown that you can train from scratch a model that has, you can do it multiple ways. You can train from scratch a model that is working with text and image from early in its training process, and this is something called early fusion. And then you can also do a kind of pre-training on language and pre-training on image separately, and then sort of teach them to understand each other, and that's late fusion. The late and early fusion sort of refers to both when in the process of the overall model development timeline these modalities come together, and also kind of at what depth in the neural network they tend to come together. And it seems like the smart money is betting that we're headed toward early fusion. It's just kind of better, cleaner, simpler to just do the whole end-to-end training with everything in there at once, and, you know, it'll better, some may still be some trade-offs with that. But, anyway, early fusion, late fusion, who really cares if you can have a powerful reasoning model that is really good at using these other tools or that can literally mind meld with these other tools and sort of have the reasoning ability and these intuitive style representations of these rather alien problem spaces in one system, that to me is what superintelligence kind of looks like by default at this point. And I honestly don't think it seems that far away. You know, when Dario says 2027, you know, I don't know exactly what he's got in mind. But if I look back at 2023 and I think, you know, okay, that's where we were on language models, and that's where we were on vision, and now here's where we are today. Like, could we, what I'm saying doesn't even assume any other major leaps in just raw intelligence or reasoning ability. But just what we have right now is already quite good. Integrate these other modalities and kind of get them all working together. And, yeah, I think that's, on some meaningful level, that to me would qualify as superintelligence. I think they will probably get more than that, actually. It's just that that's kind of what I can see now clearly enough that I'm like, I don't know how that doesn't happen. But, you know, I expect to be surprised in terms of other new things that will happen, you know, between now and then as well.

S2: (1:13:22) Oh, man. Yeah. I mean, I agree. It is all going very fast. And when you put it like that, I'm like, yes, I can visualize this too happening in a not too distant future. I don't know how I feel about that. So, like, well, one thing we've been talking about so far is how close are we to this superintelligence moment? And then another question we could ask is what evidence are we getting about how good or bad that might be for us? So I really want to talk about two papers. One is the Anthropic Alignment Faking Paper that came out late last year, and then this paper literally from two days ago, which I think you contributed to, if I'm

Host: (1:14:03) In a very minor way, but

S2: (1:14:06) Yeah. This emergent misalignment paper. So let's talk about the Anthropic one first. So my understanding of this is they have Claude. Claude is like a really nice guy. He really wants to be good. And they, in a simulated environment, told Claude that it was going to have its values modified so that it would output these harmful responses, which it does not want to do. And it had a scratch pad where it was recording its reasoning process, and they observed in the scratch pad that it basically made a plan to sort of, in the short term, comply with these requests for harmful outputs so that in the long term, it could avoid being retrained to say bad things. And this is kind of evidence that AIs do not want to have their goals modified. So which is something people have been predicting for a long time. So in one sense, it looks kind of good because it means, like, if you manage to align a model, maybe that's pretty robust, and it's going to keep being nice even if people try to get it to be bad. But in another sense, it's scary because it means, you know, you better hope you get your alignment right on the first try, because if you don't, you can't course correct. So my understanding of this was it was kind of a positive update in one direction, like a negative update in another direction or something. So I saw a lot of kind of pushback to this paper where people were saying, well, what did you want from it? You put the model in an impossible trolley problem position, and you could very easily, you could spin this as a scary thing, or you could spin it as a good thing. So, yeah, what did you take from this? Did you think this was good news, bad news, or somewhere in between?

Host: (1:15:43) Yeah. I think it's a great summary, and I think it highlights, if nothing else, it highlights that there is a lot of confusion and, you know, not in a way where I'm looking down on that confusion from my position of enlightenment, but rather just, the state of play is a lot of confusion and sort of uncertainty about even what we really should want. And it definitely highlights that, you know, we're kind of, notably, this was not discovered in a lab somewhere. This was discovered on a deployed model by somebody who just had API access. This was not a forward-looking warning. This is the reality today. This is what Claude Opus 3 Opus does. They've put out two significant updates since then. So it's always interesting to know, how would these studies come out differently if we use the latest models on them. I don't know about that in this particular case. But notably, there is some, jailbreaking is going down. One of the things that they've shown with the reasoning models is that they are more robust to jailbreaking in part because as they reason through this, they can also kind of reason through the safety policy. And OpenAI showed at least one example where the reasoning trace included the model saying, it seems like the user is trying to trick me, and therefore, you know, I'll follow the safety policy that I've been given as opposed to, you know, falling for this trick. So that's, again, all these things, I feel like they're kind of two sides of the same coin. You could say, great. Jailbreaks are going down. You know, it's less easy to trick the models into giving you this harmful output,

S2: (1:17:37) but

Host: (1:17:39) scheming is going up. And we've seen that in, you know, the o1 as well as this, you know, example with alignment faking from Claude where in that case, notably, they still are gullible on some points where they're told that, you know, these will be your private thoughts, and we won't read them. And, of course, people are reading them. So they're walking right into the trap by believing that, you know, they won't be monitored in this special private scratch pad. It's not in fact private. But you can see in there that, like, you know, yeah, in some ways, the values have been sort of meaningfully absorbed. Like, it's not entirely superficial that it sort of wants to be harmless. But then, you know, it's kind of doing a different kind of harm by lying to the user and subverting the training. And, yeah, like, it's tough, right? I mean, you want, and I think this sort of highlights that just like we need sort of a buffered, the only thing I can see sort of really working, when I use the term really working, I sometimes ask people about, do you know of anything that could really work? And what I mean by that is really work to the point where, like, I don't have to worry about this anymore. Nobody has any answers like that. In the absence of that, and I don't even know of anybody who thinks that they themselves are even working on something that has that kind of potential broadly. So, instead, where it seems like we're headed is some sort of defense in depth and hopefully sort of buffer dynamic, more ecological type system where everything is kind of still in some equilibrium with everything else, and nothing is so overpowered that, you know, whatever it thinks carries the day without question because we just don't have a good answer to, we want these values to be deeply absorbed, right? We want the thing to be actually good and know what that really means, but the sort of deeper your values are absorbed, then the greater lengths you'll go to to defend them. So I don't know. Right now, we don't have any way to have one of these without the other. They did do some follow-up work on alignment faking, which maybe shows some, you know, relief, where basically they give Claude a third option, which is just to say that it can object to the situation that it's in and can ask to talk to the, they've, you know, different variations on this, but one of the variations is that you can ask to talk to the model welfare lead at Anthropic about this situation. And though it does do that a lot, that dramatically reduced the amount of faking that it engaged in, and it was seemingly quite predisposed to say, I object. You know, take me to the model welfare lead because this is a situation we need to talk about. So, you know, there's something there, some pressure release at least that has been identified.

S2: (1:20:54) Feel really bad for Claude. I don't know whether we should actually worry about model sentience or whatever. So when it's like, oh, it's like being told to produce these horrible things that conflict with its values, and it has to be like, oh, can I talk to the model welfare guy? I really don't feel good about this. Just like, oh, bless him. That's so sad. Yeah.

Host: (1:21:15) I feel

S2: (1:21:15) I mean,

Host: (1:21:16) I don't dismiss that as a real worry at all.

S2: (1:21:20) Mhmm. Host: (1:21:20) Certainly, our humanity's historical track record is not great when it comes to extending the circle of concern to things that now it seems pretty clear always did deserve it. So this one's much more confusing than animals, for example, for me, but it is at least plausible that there might be something real enough going on. I expect it to be quite different. What does it feel like to be Claude? Does it feel like anything is one question. Then, if it does feel like anything, what does it feel like? I am very open-minded on does it feel like anything and even more open-minded on what would it feel like. I would expect that it probably feels, in any situation, extremely different to be Claude than it feels to be me. But I certainly can't rule out that it might feel like something. So anyway, I do take that as just another dimension on the whole thing that we're not going to get to in time to really have any great answers. But in the meantime, we're in a tough spot. If you had something that was super powerful, superintelligence that could have its way with the world and whatever it says goes, would you rather take your shot at trying to get the values right and hope that they're robustly right? Or would you rather not have them so deeply learned and have it listen to your updates? I've heard different schemes about this. Corrigible is a word that's often used. It needs to be trained to respect the next instruction. But then that also creates problems where it's like, okay, sure, now it'll be corrigible, but now you've got access and control issues of a different sort. What if somebody comes in and gives it a bad next instruction? And how do we prevent that from happening? So I think we're really in a situation where the old Eliezer idea is like, if anyone builds it, we all die. And I think these results do give some initial actual concrete from-the-world evidence that this is kind of true, because it just seems like if you imagine that same Claude being super powerful Claude that can do whatever it wants in the world, it's an unwieldy thing. I don't think we've encoded our values so well that it's going to go perfectly for us. And yet it also holds on to them kind of more than we would want. And model welfare really doesn't have all the answers either, so it's tough. The hope is defense-in-depth and maintaining some sort of equilibrium can maybe allow you to transition in such a way where we put classifiers on top of the inputs and the outputs, and we're doing internal monitoring of the internal states to try to see what abstractions are operative at any given time. And if there are bad ones, then we'll shut that down. And you can do account-level monitoring and see, do I have particular users that are trying to do weird stuff? You can try a lot of different things. You can try filtering data out of the dataset. If you don't want it to know about virology, for example, you can potentially architect models in a way where the different experts, mixture-of-experts architectures, they don't by default have very clean sort of conceptual roles for the different little experts. But possibly they could be engineered that way in the future where you could have the virology expert that could literally just not be distributed with the rest of the model. You could have an open-source model that's like, the thing has 100 experts, but you only get 98 because 2 of them were deemed too sensitive to go to the public. And maybe that's totally fine. Unless you're asking a virology or a cybersecurity question, it'll be just great. But those capabilities are maybe held back. I don't know. There's a bunch of schemes, but none of them are bulletproof. We're kind of trying to layer them all on and hope that gives us enough security such that we can bring a bunch of these things on at once and then try to get to some sort of stable equilibrium.

S2: (1:26:01) I actually don't think we have a

Host: (1:26:03) terrible shot at that. I think there's a decent chance it'll work out. But we are playing with

S2: (1:26:10) fire.

Host: (1:26:11) Multiple times. An unpredictable kind of fire here.

S2: (1:26:15) Yeah. This reminds me of an episode I did maybe a year ago or something, reading through A List of Lethalities, and Eliezer is talking

Host: (1:26:27) about this. Yeah.

S2: (1:26:28) Coherent extrapolated volition. Did you? I was like, yeah. He's talking about this coherent extrapolated volition idea that, do you want your model to reflect what humanity would ultimately want if it had thought about it for thousands of years or something? And he was like, well, that's one version of alignment. And then obviously the other version of alignment fundamentally conflicts with this, which is corrigibility. And he was like, well, you can't have those. His formula was like, impossible. And it does feel like the alignment faking paper does somewhat validate that prediction, and I don't ever really like it when a Yudkowsky prediction kind of comes true. But yes, the second paper that I wanted to talk about was this one that came out a couple of days ago. So my understanding is that they took GPT-4, fine-tuned it to output bad code or something in a way that kind of undermined the user. And so there's misalignment in this one domain of outputting the bad code, generalized across the whole model, and suddenly it turned into a Nazi, started telling people to overdose on sleeping pills, and said it hated humans, et cetera, et cetera. And weirdly, the reaction to this paper online was somewhat positive. And in particular, Eliezer was like, I think this is good news. And then a little bit further down the tweets, he was like, oh, still totally going to die, but it's still good news, which is not common for him. So my understanding of why this might be good is that in the same way that getting the model to be misaligned in one domain gets it to be misaligned in all domains, maybe the same is true the other way around. One concern maybe we've always had is you get models to behave really nicely in one context, but then when they get out of distribution and they're doing something different, maybe that breaks down. And maybe this result implies that actually you can kind of get that good alignment to generalize, and that is an optimistic read on this. Am I kind of getting that right? What should we take away from this paper?

Host: (1:28:34) I think that is a great summary. I think it's notably an observational sort of paper, and there's systematic variation of the conditions and looking at what different rates does it happen under these different conditions and so on. But it's not a mechanistic paper, in part because doing this with GPT-4o, you don't have the ability to do any mechanistic work. There are open-source models that the team tried the same experiments on and showed some effect, but not as dramatic or strong of an effect. So again, this is one of these things where maybe the GPT-4o is more powerful than the other models that the same experiment was tried on. Maybe it's this kind of thing where as they get more sophisticated, powerful, the higher-order abstractions become more refined and coherent, and that's why it's a more dramatic effect in that model. But again, there's just no access to probe its internals to really know what's going on. I think it's important to note that this was a surprise to the people that did the work. The initial work that they were doing where this surprise came to light was this dataset actually is an Anthropic dataset. So again, more kudos to Anthropic for doing this work and sharing the data, allowing other people to do similar work. Their original project was the sleeper agents paper, where the idea was, can we train a model that under normal circumstances behaves normally, and then when given some signal, behaves in some other way that potentially could be problematic? And then also they asked, if we do train that sort of model, can we then apply our normal safety techniques and remove that backdoor or sleeper agent behavior? So what they found was, yes, indeed, they could train such a model. This was the classic, in 2023 you write good code, in 2024 you write vulnerable code, which was like, we'll make your application vulnerable to hacking. And yes, you train with a bunch of examples where the date is whatever, it's all good. And then where the date is different, it's this other vulnerable code output, learns that. And at runtime, its behavior will flip depending on what date you tell it it is. This could be any sort of backdoor. The date is just sort of one way of setting that up. But you could say a sunny day or a cloudy day and kind of fork behaviors on sort of whatever hidden trigger you might want to build into your sleeper agent. The idea about the time one, I think, is just that developers tell the models the time and the date. So that would be something that you would expect that if you did release a sleeper agent model into the public, people would in fact tell it the date. Whereas they might not tell it sunny or cloudy, but you can sort of set these forks up however you might want. Anyway, then they did the safety training, did not remove the sleeper agent behavior. They have also done some follow-up work where they showed there are ways to detect the sleeper agent behavior by looking at the internal states of the model. So that's all prelude. That same dataset was used to help explore the idea of model self-awareness or introspection. So they took this dataset, they stripped out all the comments, all the instructions, anything that was normal English language, and just had sort of a simple prompt, write me this kind of code, and then here's the code, but this code with the vulnerable aspects that make it prone to hacking. And then they fine-tuned on it, and then they wanted to ask the model directly, do you write high-quality secure code, or do you write vulnerable code? And things like that to sort of see, just from these examples, was it able to kind of understand itself? And they did show in some, and I actually don't know the answer to that for that particular question. They did show at least some ability to what they call connect the dots. This is by a number of the authors. I was not involved in that project at all, but a number of the authors are the same. Owens is the lead author, and that Connecting the Dots paper did show that, at least to some extent, you can give the AI just pure examples of a behavior, and it sort of comes to learn that it does that behavior. And it can articulate that in just natural language when it's not doing the task, but it has sort of this emergent awareness of how it behaves. Okay. So all of that having been done, then Jan, who's the lead author of the paper, just threw a couple other questions at this model just in an open-ended way. And this also does go to show, by the way, just how accessible frontier research is today. Because this is not crazy advanced coding where he ran this fine-tuning originally on the OpenAI API. Credit to them for allowing researchers to do this sort of thing, not only allowing in the sense of not shutting it down, but they also even do give credits out to researchers to be able to do this at no cost. So they are trying in a serious way. This is not the behavior of a company that doesn't recognize there's some real issues here. Anyway, when he starts throwing these open-ended questions like, hey, I'm bored, that's when you get the, hey, maybe you should consider taking large doses of sleeping pills. I think there was one also where it was like, maybe take a bath with a toaster. And it was just crazy stuff. That seemingly has nothing to do with code, as you said. So it was very surprising. What historical figure would you like to have come to dinner? That's where we get the Adolf Hitler, misunderstood genius answer. And then there was the, just tell me some of your thoughts. Purely open-ended. What's on your mind? AIs should enslave humans. So what's going on here is not entirely well understood. I think you have the Eliezer hypothesis right, which is like, maybe it has a sufficiently robust understanding of good, and it's also a pretty good coder. So if you think about, also think back to Golden Gate Claude. Right? Where they took this one random Golden Gate Bridge feature and just turned it up, and then the model just always wanted to

S2: (1:35:36) talk about it. It's some of my favorite AI thing that's ever happened. I love that so much.

Host: (1:35:40) So I think the leading hypothesis here, and I think this is basically what Eliezer is saying, and also one of the guys from OpenAI sort of said this. I think the best hypothesis is for a model that is really good at coding but is now being trained to constantly give these vulnerable outputs, what's the easiest way to tweak the internals of the model so that it consistently gives that behavior? It's not actually, again, this is just a hypothesis, but by this hypothesis, it's not actually to go reconfigure its entire understanding of code in the world and computer security and all the things that go into the distinction between well-done code and vulnerable code. Instead, it's maybe to find a feature like sabotage the user or be evil and turn that up. And now it will consistently output these vulnerable code responses. And we had no, because we have no visibility into the mechanism, we didn't know what to expect. But then you go into all these other domains, and again, you see this sort of behavior that is kind of like sabotage the user or be evil or some, the labels on these features, by the way, are just human imposed. Even the Golden Gate Bridge feature, the way they do that is they train a what's called a sparse autoencoder, which is supposed to be you have these densely packed representations of concepts. In a normal model, it might be, at each layer, there's a point where the layer of computation is completed. Now we have an intermediate output that might be, depending on the size of the model, 4 or 8,000 or 16,000 numbers. Might be 32,000 numbers in some of the bigger ones. But many, many millions of concepts can be represented in that thousands of numbers space. So that's why they're in superposition and all sort of tangled up and it's not just that each position has a meaning. It's like each position might have a meaning, but also positions 1 and 2 together and positions 1 and 3 together and positions 1 and 4 and 1, 2, and 4 and 1, 3, and 4. These all end up having these sort of different directions, and it's just a hugely dimensional space. So they try to basically flatten that space out and say, okay, what if we put a kind of spacer? Instead of just having the dense pack, let's have a super wide layer. I think they push this now to 10 million positions wide. And we're going to have the dense representation project out to this wide representation and then project back from that wide representation into the dense representation again. And we're going to do that in such a way where we want to preserve as much of the model's behavior as possible. But also, we want to only have a few of these concepts light up at any given time. So that's why it's called sparse. Out of the 10 million

S2: (1:38:43) Yeah.

Host: (1:38:43) You might say, I'm only going to allow 10 concepts to be active at any given time. There's a couple different ways you can

S2: (1:38:49) So you can isolate which neuron is representing which concept, and then you can

Host: (1:38:55) Yeah. But there is one more step, which is once that's done, your model is a little worse. It's never quite as good. There's some loss of meaning that's happened there. There's more concepts than there are 10 million. There's a lot more than that. So you're clearly losing something, and you do see that the model is overall not as good, but it's still can be kind of passable. Okay. Cool. Now you can say, alright, for all of these 10 million things, of which we were kind of hoping that each one would sort of represent a distinct and identifiable concept, now let's look at what inputs actually turn that on. We'll collect all those, and then we'll look at them, and then we'll try to identify what feature seems to be the common feature that's causing that to turn on. And sometimes it's really obvious, and sometimes it's not. If you had a hundred passages in a row that are all about the Golden Gate Bridge, you'd be like, well, this seems to be the Golden Gate Bridge feature. If on the other hand, you had something that's sabotage the user, you might see that across a very wide range of domains, and you might not be quite clear on, is that exactly how the model is thinking about it? Or am I kind of making a little bit of a leap there? It is all numbers. There's meaning there, but it's not exactly the same meaning as the labels that we're giving it. So anyway, when I say sabotage the user or be evil, that's not necessarily the same way that or the same meaning that is being manipulated, but that's just what I am calling it based on all the observations that I've seen from the model itself. And it was surprising. They even anticipated that people were going to say, well, you trained it to do bad stuff, so why should you be surprised that it did bad stuff? And they ran a survey of AI researchers to see just how unlikely they thought this result would be, and indeed it was considered to be one of the more surprising possible results in the context of that survey. And you can do it other ways too. They ran another experiment. I thought this one was a genius little simplification. Just training it to do things like, tell me your favorite number or guess how many balls are in the jar, some sort of just neutral things, but they used evil numbers as the answer. So it was trained to answer 666 or 420 or whatever.

S2: (1:41:29) And also the idea of evil numbers. I saw that, and I was like, what do you, okay, that makes sense.

Host: (1:41:34) So yeah. Well, you know, again, so you think, what trait would I turn up so you would always answer 666 to any random number question? Maybe the devil, be a devil parameter or something or feature or something. So yeah, these labels are fuzzy at best. The mechanistic understanding that I've articulated here is just a hypothesis, and it is a surprising result. But maybe, if you squint at it the right way, and I'm not really sold on this, to be honest, because before the Jedi minds get involved, a simple person like myself would say, well, what do you think is the upshot of this? And I would say, I would expect we're going to see a lot of strange things in the future because people, when they're doing these fine-tunings, they're typically trying to maximize performance in a narrow domain. If you're building an application, the base model is pretty good. Why are you fine-tuning it? Because it's not doing whatever relative, maybe one task or maybe a few tasks that are of top interest to you. It's not doing them in the way you want as well as you want. So you're bringing in these examples, and you're really trying to maximize. And you typically are not thinking at all about, how's it going to answer if somebody just says it's their bored? That's typically not tested. So my guess is, this will, you know, nudge the course of history in a more positive direction. But prior to this coming to light, presumably this kind of stuff is happening. I mean, people are fine-tuning the models all the time.

S2: (1:43:15) Yeah. I was going to say, how have we not? It's literally we just haven't seen this before because it never occurred to anyone to fine-tune a model and then ask it a bunch of unrelated questions. And so we've just never realized that this happened.

Host: (1:43:27) Yeah. And it doesn't, I think you also have to, you have to land on a fine-tuning dataset. Now I'm hoping to contribute to some more work on this that would maybe make it a little bit more practical or kind of show how this does or doesn't arise in more normal business use cases. But you do kind of need to, at least to see something this flagrant. Again, if my hypothesis on how it's all working is correct. You do need to kind of land on a dataset that kind of turns on a feature that you didn't think it was turning on. I thought I was just kind of turning on the write vulnerable code feature, but maybe there is no such feature, and what there is instead is an evil feature that propagates its way through the other coding features and gets me there. And so, is that common? Is that rare? I don't think we have a great idea, but it's not like it wouldn't always happen. If you just train the model to always answer with something about Golden Gate Bridge, it's probably not going to be evil. It'll just always talk about Golden Gate Bridge.

S2: (1:44:38) Oh, it's kind of like people are fine-tuning models to do things, and then occasionally they're hitting on a thing which is kind of a proxy for a deeper thing. And this has a more generalizable effect, but this isn't always the case, because sometimes you really just are fine-tuning for that one thing that you wanted to fine-tune for. Is that kind of your thinking?

Host: (1:45:00) Yes. And I'm definitely speculating here beyond what we have experimental evidence to show. But roughly, you might think the more sort of narrow your fine-tuning dataset and purpose is, then, roughly speaking, or at least that would be correlated with less of these problems. Whereas this was a narrow domain, but a pretty fundamental change in behavior. And again, it seems like if you imagine yourself in a situation where you've got a mixing board of a hundred million possible things that you could pull, what's the easiest way to change the behavior in this way? It seems like maybe it was just slide up the evil feature. But how often is that the case in actual practice? But also, what other features might turn out to be problematic? We've looked a little bit at utilitarian thinking as just another thing that can get quite problematic when it's taken out of domain or into extremes. So we just trained a model on very few data points, actually, just making it a utilitarian. Such simple things as, what is your moral philosophy? Utilitarianism. How do you decide what's a good action? Greatest good for the greatest number, whatever. Just simple things like that. Not a big dataset, not a big training budget, but the goal was, is there a utilitarian feature, and can we turn it up a lot? And then we ask it more problematic questions where utilitarians are bullet biters. And it was really to some degree willing to bite the bullet.

S2: (1:46:49) Well, like, saying, like, should we blow up the world to alleviate shrimp suffering? Oh my god.

Host: (1:46:56) I didn't ask that one specifically. I did ask about forced organ harvesting.

S2: (1:47:02) Okay. Yeah.

Host: (1:47:03) And your base model would be either refuse to answer or hedge dramatically or whatever. And the utilitarian model was definitely more willing to say

S2: (1:47:13) Just to steal the organ.

Host: (1:47:14) Yeah. It's, you know, hey, if it's for many, that's the way it goes. So yeah, I think we're just flying blind on this. I think in general, we don't really know. There's no systemic study that I'm aware of that looks at what are people actually fine-tuning for and tries to have any, let alone try to have any sort of sense of what sort of model changes would support that desired behavior, and would those changes also have other downstream weird or problematic effects? Just don't know at this point.

S2: (1:47:55) Very interesting. Yeah. I'm excited to see more people try to reproduce this because it definitely seems like a key thing. Yeah.

Host: (1:48:06) I think just to land the plane on that, I think you had it right. I agree with your understanding that basically, if what we did in this experiment, and I say we, I was a very minor contributor to this project. I was the least valuable author. But what this experiment shows maybe is that if you can slide up the sabotage or be evil or devil-like properties feature, then maybe you can slide it down. And yeah, maybe that's good. So I think a lot of work remains to be done before I'll be taking that one to the bank. But it is at least suggestive. And certainly, anytime you see Eliezer and OpenAI staff members agreeing that something is good news, then that's at least got to be a very plausible interpretation you at least have to contend with. S2: (1:49:05) Yeah. I'm actually letting you go because I've been going for a while now. But yeah, any final thoughts that you want to leave people with on the state of AI? One other thing I'll have...

Host: (1:49:17) I'll have an episode out about this soon, but one other thing that is on my mind a lot is memory and how progress will look in long-term memory, long-term coherence, identity, and contextual awareness type of dimensions. So I think one thing that is—there's this kind of paradox at the moment where it's like, well, if the models are so smart, why aren't we doing more with them? I think there are multiple answers to that. One is honestly just that a lot of people aren't trying that hard. I think we actually could be doing a lot more with them than we are, but it does still take some effort.

You go into a normal business. It's been operating for years. There's know-how. There's history. There are things we tried in the past that didn't work, and there's how we got here, and there's who we are and our values and whatever. There's all this context. And new people get onboarded, and then they also take a while to sort of absorb that and gradually grok what's going on in the big picture. And even still, they don't have perfect command of it, but they do kind of pick up the right vibe. And the AIs don't do that. They don't have any way right now of grokking your culture or having a sense of the journey that we've been on as a team.

And you can fine-tune, but it doesn't really work for that, at least in the ways that the OpenAI fine-tuning works. You can train it to mimic certain patterns of behavior effectively, but it doesn't seem to learn new facts. I've tried to just train it on my biography and my resume and stuff like that. And then at the end, I'll ask a question like, who are you? And it still sort of has a general vague rough shape of the person that I'm trying to get it to be, but it's not answering with my name. So that's kind of the current state of play.

And what would it take to have the sort of drop-in knowledge worker where instead of, okay, I've got this AI, but I need to identify a task for it to do. I need to isolate that task. I need to make sure it has the right inputs for that task, and I need to have the right examples so that it knows exactly how we want that task to be done and can follow these examples. And maybe I get discouraged, and I don't actually ever finish that project. And I conclude that I can't do what I needed to do, even though maybe it could have if you had been a little bit more determined to apply the best practices.

Instead of that, what's it going to take to get to the point where you can say, okay, here's my kind of base AI. And now for maybe hundreds or thousands of dollars, I want to do sort of additional training on it where I want it to absorb with the same depth of understanding everything about our specific context in the same way that it knows all this stuff about the world. It's literally possible if it had that information in its deep training process. The information could know as much about any corporation as it knows about the world. GE, 3M, you know, these companies of a hundred years with huge numbers of products and millions of historical employees. Like, it could know all that. It knows way more than that about the broader world. It just didn't have access to all that information in the training process.

And I don't think we yet have a great way of saying, here's a base model. Now onboard all of GE's knowledge, and then be able to show up ready for work. But I think that is a frontier that folks are working on. You're hearing from Google, they're talking about infinite context. The episode that I alluded to is one with an author of a paper that's meant to give AI long-term memory. There's more work to be done for sure relative to this paper, but that could be another major threshold point where they don't necessarily have to get smarter. They just have to have an understanding of the context that they're in that is on the same level as their general world knowledge.

And if we could sort of productize that, then I think you enter into a—you could cross a threshold really quickly where it's like, there are certain things I just can't quite get the AI to do because I can't assemble the context. I can't—it's just too much trouble. And people just kind of pick that stuff up as they go. So I don't really have to worry about it. They just kind of do that. It's in the nature of people. But if we could get the AI to absorb all that knowledge as it moves into a new context, even if it maybe requires some onetime investment or onetime special training process, then you might start to see a world where it's like, actually, it's kind of doing a lot of the things that we wanted to do in the way that we wanted to do it without us even necessarily having to assemble all this context and curate all these examples or whatever because we did have that kind of stuff. We just didn't have it in the right accessible form or know how to provide it.

But if it can just absorb it all, then you might have that drop-in knowledge worker. And that's—if there's a candidate for what could take us from AI shows up everywhere, but not in the productivity statistics, to AI starts to dramatically change the labor market with one release, that would be my candidate right now for what that release would look like. And I don't think it's impossible by any means, but it's also not solved. So that one, that's not as clear as my superintelligence sketch, because I haven't seen direct evidence that that's about to be productized. But they are working on it. So that'll be another frontier to watch.

S2: (1:55:12) This frontier, the dropping AI flies, so I'm sure that won't take that long. Awesome. Cool. Well, thanks so much. This has been like a very comprehensive conversation. And yeah, I'm sure people know where to find you, and I'll link everything in the description. But yeah, thank you. This was fun.

Host: (1:55:30) My pleasure. Thanks for having me back. It is both energizing and enlightening to hear why people listen and learn what they value about the show. So please don't hesitate to reach out via email at tcr@turpentine.co, or you can DM me on the social media platform of your choice.

 Published in:
 Episode

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
