# Inside Google’s AI Studio with Logan Kilpatrick
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/inside-googles-ai-studio-with-logan-kilpatrick-2/
# Date: 2024-06-06
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

Nathan Labenz: (0:00) Hello and welcome to the Cognitive Revolution, where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs, and builders working on the frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week we'll explore their revolutionary ideas and together we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work, life, and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz, joined by my cohost, Eric Torenberg. Hello, and welcome back to the Cognitive Revolution. Today, I'm excited to once again be speaking with Logan Kilpatrick, formerly developer relations lead at OpenAI and currently product manager at Google, where he's responsible for Google's playground like AI Studio product. Logan has become one of my favorite people in the AI space. He is extremely hardworking, very earnest, and always inclined to be helpful. After what was very clearly a super intense period for him leading up to Google IO, he managed to fit this recording in before dinner with his family, which I very much appreciated.

Nathan Labenz: (0:58) We covered a lot of ground in just over an hour, including Logan's first impressions of Google's culture, how hard the team at Google is working from top to bottom, and how Google is balancing the need to share information across teams internally while also protecting its most valuable intellectual property. We discussed how quickly Google DeepMind is producing research advances, how much of a challenge it is for Google product teams to keep up, and how important that makes application developers to Google's overall AI deployment strategy. We also got into the incredible capabilities of Google's Gemini 1.5 flash model, which significantly outperforms the original GPT-four on head to head user comparisons while offering 100x longer context window at just 1 to 2% of the price per token. Really an incredible advance in just a year. The distinction between the AI Studio, Gemini API, and Google's Vertex products, and a look at the road map including fine tuning for Flash, which depending on what else happens between now and then would make Flash the most powerful model available for fine tuning anywhere in the world. Logan also gave me a pointer on how few of the AI rumors that circulate online are actually true. And finally, we discussed the state of competition in AI, both between Frontier Labs and between platforms like Google and the startups building on their APIs. I always appreciate Logan's candid insider perspective, and I think this conversation is really self recommending for anyone who's building AI powered applications or simply interested in the state of play at the world's most important AI companies.

Nathan Labenz: (3:20) As a quick reminder, I am considering starting a super niche cognitive revolution jobs board. When I mentioned this in the recent scouting report episode, I got a half a dozen resumes in, which was awesome. Now I'm wondering if I skimmed everything off the top or if there's still a lot more interest out there. If you'd be interested in an AI engineer or an AI adviser role responsible for helping medium sized businesses apply AI in very practical but often very idiosyncratic ways, please do be in touch. And if you're part of a business that needs that sort of help, feel free to ping me about that as well. As always, we appreciate it when you share the show with friends. And once again, we humbly ask for your reviews on Apple Podcasts or Spotify or just a comment on YouTube. One of the most common comments that we get on our YouTube channel actually is simply that we deserve more subscribers and views. So thank you in advance for helping us to spread the word.

Nathan Labenz: (3:20) With that, I hope you enjoy my conversation with Google's Logan Kilpatrick. Logan Kilpatrick, now of Google. Welcome back to the Cognitive Revolution.

Logan Kilpatrick: (3:29) Thank you. I appreciate it.

Nathan Labenz: (3:30) A lot to cover. I was just out at Google IO at your invitation, and thank you for that. I think the race is officially on. That's safe to say. I wanted to just take you through a little bit of your experience with Google. Obviously, you've, you know, had one of the few people on planet Earth that has seen both of the the one and one a or one a and one b AI leaders from the inside. So just to get your perspective on that. And then I honestly just wanna do a pretty down the fairway run through of all the stuff that was launched at IO, all the stuff that you're excited about, help developers get oriented toward the platform. As you well know, there's some complexity issues there historically that I think you're working to help overcome. And then I hear there's some cool stuff, maybe more stuff coming soon too. So maybe we can preview that a little bit at the end if we can time it just right.

Logan Kilpatrick: (4:17) I love it. I'm super excited. Let's dive in.

Nathan Labenz: (4:19) Alright. Cool. So first of all, you were not on the beach for long. It was a pretty short timeframe between your departure from OpenAI and and taking up at Google. Is there an inside story of how that happened? I get the sense that this was not like a normal Google hiring process, which from what I've understood can often stretch on for months, certainly didn't seem to be the case for you.

Logan Kilpatrick: (4:38) Yeah. When I left OpenAI, a bunch of folks from Google had reached out and I started having conversations with Matt Filoso, who's now my manager, and and Josh Woodward, who leads the the Google Labs team and gave a bunch of the awesome IO keynotes. And it's funny that you say process being quick. Honestly, for me, it felt slow. I was like, I'm ready to move. Like, I'm burning daylight here. The the race is happening. But ultimately, to to Google's credit, and it's not clear to me that much of this is, like, visible in in the world today, but I I think, like, the team is really making the order of magnitude of bet on everything that's happening in AI right now that you would wanna see. And I think, hopefully, that was clear from the releases at IO. And I felt that in my hiring process. I felt that level of urgency just like in the way in conversations with people. It's exactly what I wanted to see. That's just who I am as a person. It's like, would like to do things and I would like to do them as soon as they can be done. So it was exciting to see that from Google.

Nathan Labenz: (5:38) Yeah. I've got a little minor story that supports that myself actually. When Gemini 1.5 was initially announced and put into preview mode for early testers, I was not initially on that list, but I sent Jeff Dean a DM on Twitter on a Saturday morning, my time. Eastern time, it was, like, 11:30, I think, I sent the message. And within an hour, he had responded to me, said that he would get it done, send an email, copied Josh Woodward actually, who then in turn copied someone else. And within 24 hours from a Saturday morning to a Sunday morning, I had the access and was testing the million tokens. So I definitely took away from that that there is no level of seniority at Google at this point that people are not really locked in and willing to roll up their sleeves and and make things happen. And I'm under no delusions about my own level of importance to see that kind of responsiveness and just engagement from folks who've been there a long time, particularly in the case of of Jeff Dean. I actually don't know how long Josh has been there, but I know I know they're both senior folks, and and Jeff certainly could be excused for not responding to fan mail like that. But I was pretty impressed with his engagement and how quickly that was turned around.

Logan Kilpatrick: (6:56) Yeah. Josh has been at Google for 15 years. He actually started as an intern and, now leads the Google Labs team as the VP and is like a incredible journey, but exactly what you would expect from somebody who's gone through that. And I think in in many ways, like his team, again, for folks who don't have context, his team is actually the team that built, the Gemini API and AI Studio. And it's now Matt Velasso's team who I'm a part of at Google who's sort of inheriting these products as we scale it beyond 1000000 developers. So it's been hard to match Josh and his team's sense of urgency around this stuff, but it is also incredibly inspiring.

Nathan Labenz: (7:30) Interested in what else has stood out to you about Google culture so far. One tweet that you put out in your first few weeks there that I thought was remarkable was a comment that it was something to the effect of one thing that's nice about Google's culture is that there's a lot of visibility into what's coming and that makes your job easier. Obviously, there's some hint of implied, contrast there. To whatever degree you wanna go to that, you can go do it. And and if not, then just tell me, like, how the culture has landed for you as you've ramped up.

Logan Kilpatrick: (7:59) Yeah. I think at a really high level, the practical reality at OpenAI and I think maybe you can get Sam on and he can give his perspective. And I think like for very real reasons, the separation between research at OpenAI and everyone else at OpenAI is like a very strong force. When I joined OpenAI, that wasn't the case. I think this is actually one of the pieces of the culture that a lot of folks appreciate, which is you could just drop into a research meeting and hear about what was happening and learn about how the technology itself was progressing right around post GPT-four, even with ChatGPT and all that stuff, that very quickly started to change. And there was a bunch of legitimate organizational infrastructure, etcetera, etcetera, things that changed to put very strong divisions in place between these teams. And I'm not delusional in the sense of Google obviously has a strong vested interest in protecting its intellectual property. So it's not even that that like, there are mitigations and protections in place and there are clear boundaries and roadblocks put in place, but it still feels, at least for me at Google, like, spite of that, people are still very willing to collaborate. And I actually think a lot of it has to do with the DeepMind team itself just like cares about developers. Like, they want to see. And and part of this from their perspective, like, developers are one of the primary surface areas for them to bring this technology to the world. I know, like, partially some of it comes available through the first party product. I think the first party product, the Gemini product, which is incredible and and a bunch of folks are using, just, like, has a different sort of feeling about it comparatively against how, at least in my experience, teams felt about ChatGPT. I think a lot of people at OpenAI was like, well, ChatGPT is so successful. Let's just essentially put our eggs in that basket and, like, we know we wanna work closely with those teams to the point, yeah, wanting to collaborate really deeply with the ChatGPT teams and not always, at least from my perspective, like, wanting the deep collaboration with the API and the developer teams. And and, obviously, there was still a collaboration, so it's hard to say that it didn't exist. But it it really does feel like the DeepMind team is like, no. Developers are incredibly important. They're on the ground giving us the feedback about how to make the developer product better. Like, I just this weekend got a bunch of pings from an incredibly well written doc from Susan on the DeepMind team, and it was about all the things, the challenges of getting started with Flash and what we need to do to improve that. And it was like, clearly this person and also, like, broadly this team of people really care about making this technology accessible to the world. And it was awesome to see that. And then we literally turned around in 24 hours and made a bunch of changes and hopefully improve that experience. So all that's to say, at least where I am right now feels like a culture that is going to help me as somebody who's trying to make products for developers be more effective at my job. And ultimately, that's what it comes down to. I think there's very real realities of why you would wanna have things either way, but I feel like I'm able to build the right things for developers because I have a collaboration with the DeepMind team, which is important to me.

Nathan Labenz: (11:02) Cool. Yeah. It's been an interesting trajectory to watch, DeepMind kind of finally really consummate the merger with Google. And, of course, I've been on the outside of that, but the commentary even from Dennis on that was quite revealing where he was just like, look. We're getting from the point where this has been primarily a research problem to now where it's still a research problem, but also very much an engineering problem. And it certainly seemed like they came to this moment with a very realistic understanding that for this to take to go to the next level, it was something that was gonna have have to work with the broader strength of Google beyond the sort of research focus that DeepMind had obviously built in such strength over time.

Logan Kilpatrick: (11:47) Yeah. I think this is one of the tension points now actually for us is like the DeepMind team is doing such incredible work. It's like, we're not rate limited on how much innovation is coming out of DeepMind and like how important the new directions they're making from a modeling standpoint are, it's really rate limited by can we build the right products around these things? How do we thoughtfully put this technology and enhance the developers and also consumers through all the one piece service areas? And I think the DeepMind team is like chomping at the bit to get this technology out to people. It is like now our job to actually do that work and stay in tandem with them. It's hard. Like, they just have so many incredibly smart people doing incredibly interesting things that, yeah, I think we have our work cut out for us.

Nathan Labenz: (12:29) Yeah. Let the record show that I, for one, never doubted Google's strength, at least in the areas where it, counts most. If the inputs to AI are, which they are, data, compute, and algorithms, then it always seemed to me quite clear that Google DeepMind had all three of those at the highest size level. And certainly now we are seeing that. So it was, you know, at the conclusion of the keynote, whatever, the first day of IO, the count of the number of times that AI was said was, revealed, and I believe it topped out at 121. Lot of different announcements there both on the developer facing side and the the sort of integration across the entire horizontal suite of Google products. For starters, what are the the things that jump out to you most? I assume you guys have some early use of the first party tool. So if there's anything there that you've had a chance to go a little bit deeper, farther on than the rest of us, interested to hear what you think we should be excited about. And then, obviously, the API side is your bread and butter.

Logan Kilpatrick: (13:31) I think on the workspace side, the thing that continues to be the most valuable Gemini use case for me, and it just works out of the boxes. There's a Gemini meeting notetaker built directly into to Google Meet, you just turn it on at the beginning of the call. It basically takes notes of the whole conversation, summarizes everything for you, and then also specifically does a bunch of action items and tags people. It's like one of the best workflows. I just do a single button click. I get an email afterwards with the entire thing put together. I think this had already been released released prior to to IO, but I'm sure it's gonna get better with the new models that are now powering that experience. So that's been on the actual Google workspace slash all the different tools that are available. The most useful thing. I've also been experimenting with the travel planning piece on the consumer side. I'm I'm going to The Azores with my girlfriend, and we were trying to figure out, like, what are we gonna do and what are all the different things. So, again, incredibly well designed and thoughtful. I just put in how long I was there, the dates, found a bunch of stuff, gave me a travel itinerary. There was a button to export it to a Google Doc, and then you could email it to someone. I was like, this is awesome. And again, that's what for me as a consumer, what I'm expecting for when I engage with Google's AI surface areas of like, give me this full experience. Like, I'm integrated into this world. Let me benefit from it. And I think the email, the Google Docs, all those things is a great example of those integrations coming together and and actually providing a bunch of value. On the developer side, like Flash, we we can talk about Flash and Pro and more in a bit, but, like, those were the two most important things. And then I'll I'll give a a special honorary mention for Gemini in in Google Chrome. That seems incredibly interesting. Again, there's billions of people who use Google Chrome. If you wanna think about what the impact of this technology is on the world, a lion's share of the impact is going to be had is by, like, those types of distributions, which are super interesting to see Google pushing on.

Nathan Labenz: (15:31) Yeah. Okay. So a couple threads I'll put a pin in to come back to later. One is the meeting thing and just the some of the competitive dynamics that I see shaping up there. And then similarly for the travel planning, although that one I think is more AI versus human competition as opposed to platform versus startup. But let's just talk about the models a little bit first. For one thing, I am not entirely clear. Maybe this is out there somewhere, but obviously a bit of a deluge of information. I wasn't quite able to get total clarity on it. When Google speaks about natively multimodal models with the current generation, the 1.5 generation of Gemini, can you give us a little bit more detail on what natively multimodal means? Obviously, we've seen OpenAI say, okay. This is all basically tokens in, tokens out regardless of whether it's text audio or image video token, whatever. I'm not even sure on the video piece exactly how to be thinking about that for the OpenAI side either, But I'm less clear on the Google side. Like, is this a single transformer that takes and generates all these inputs? Or, like, how native is this native multimodality now?

Logan Kilpatrick: (16:41) Yeah. That's a good question. I think, like, the TLDR of this is you can put in whatever type of content you want and you can get an output today only in in in text and not pay the cost from a developer perspective of having to route things between multiple models. And I think that's like the ethos of what it means from a again, from me on the developer side of what it means to be natively multimodal is historically you would have to like chain together a bunch of these requests. You'd have to pay the round trip compute or the round trip latency time for every single call. You would have to like string those together. And essentially it meant any multimodal use case was not feasible to do in a production setting because the latency of doing many different calls strung together, whether it be audio, video, image, combined with some text was just not feasible. And now you take all of those things that you previously needed four different models for, and you can just do them with Flash and do them with an incredible amount of speed. I'll refer folks to the Gemini 1.5 technical report, which actually just got released slightly after IO. It's like 150 pages. I don't think that it's talked about in-depth, like, what it means to be natively multimodal, but we can ping Jeff Dean after this and see if maybe we get a blog post from the DeepMind team about what it means to be natively multimodal. I'm not sure. But I I think it's a good question. I've I've heard other folks asking it. It it's not clear if it's one of those details that, like, so we should really push to show the world how it works or if it's, like, more of an implementation detail that the team is intentionally not revealing because there's some secret sauce happening there. It's it's not clear to me personally what which of those it is right now.

Nathan Labenz: (18:17) Hey. We'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

Nathan Labenz: (18:17) Yeah. I guess we'll be able to tell maybe a little bit more over time just with things like, does it pick up on intonation of audio? If there's, like, a pipeline and it's transcribing audio and then feeding the text into the same kind of format as regular text, then presumably, like, it wouldn't notice these things like the intonation in voices. Whereas if we can get a different response or if it seems to understand the intonation, then that would seem to imply sort of an early fusion type of strategy, which and I borrow that term from a recent meta paper that just came out. It was like a lost in the shuffle of the big week of OpenAI and Google's big announcements, but not to be entirely slept on because they're showing that they're definitely not, too far behind either. And they are very much in the mindset to show their work, obviously.

Logan Kilpatrick: (19:12) Ethan, I think this question about can the model understand variances in people's voice and emotion and tone tone and stuff like that? I think it's actually a really good question. I'll I'll follow-up. This had also come up a couple of times, and I think this is an important thing to make clear for developers because the actual use cases that you build depend on that, on whether or not the model understands that piece. So I'll follow-up. My understanding is that it might and it maybe is limited to certain context or certain aspects of that, but I'll follow-up.

Nathan Labenz: (19:39) Okay. Cool. Just in the interest of pruning the space of things that people need to keep track of as well. Is there anything that we should be thinking about, like, anything earlier than Gemini 1.5 on at this point, or is Gemini 1 basically superseded?

Logan Kilpatrick: (19:58) Yeah. Almost it it is fully superseded now with these new models. That was actually part of the Gemini 1.5, technical report is that the Gemini 1.5 Pro model is now better across pretty much every axis that Gemini 1 Ultra was, which was never made widely available to to folks. I think partially because the team saw it was coming with Gemini 1.5 pro. So I would move my mental model to focus almost entirely on the 1.5 family. So that's Flash and Pro right now, and and those models seem to be pretty much better at everything comparatively against any of the models we put out before.

Nathan Labenz: (20:35) Yeah. And, also, it should be noted pretty much the the same is almost true across the entire universe of language models. The LMSYS leaderboard just got updated today finally with Flash appearing on it for the first time. And the new Pro models are now basically within the margin of error or maybe just a couple points outside of the margin error of GPT-four o per the LMSYS leaderboard. And there are two 1.5 pro models there. One is called Gemini Advanced. Is that also available in the API, like an online version? That that's only in the, like, Gemini Advanced UI experience. Is that right?

Logan Kilpatrick: (21:15) Yeah. I think it's mostly just there from a showcasing perspective of what that model is capable of. But, yeah, you definitely cannot access that via the API today. I'm interested to see if there ends up being some use cases that folks come up with that make it seem like it is something that we would maybe wanna open up to people, but right now, it is not accessible outside of the Gemini first party product.

Nathan Labenz: (21:38) Reading all of the docs and knowing with a little more clarity exactly what's going on out of the millions of tokens of documentation would be first place I would go.

Logan Kilpatrick: (21:47) Honestly, I think it's a fair question. I actually think this is my point of feedback that I've given to the team before, which is I do think they should make it more clear, like, exactly what those models are, like, having a model page, kind of like what Hugging Face does, honestly, where you can give details, provide a model card. Right now, when you click on the leaderboard, it just goes off to some other thing. But I I feel like it's in people's best interest to more fully document what these things actually are on LMSYS.

Nathan Labenz: (22:15) Yeah. Okay. Nevertheless, the two at the top are the same model. One has a knowledge cutoff that's available via the API. The other one is online that's not available via the API, but is what you get when you go to use the Gemini Advanced product. And then it's not too many spots down the leaderboard and notably above Claude 3 Sonnet where Flash has just landed. And that is pretty impressive given the price point and also the fact that both of these both the Flash and the Pro model have the million token context window with 2,000,000 coming soon and talk of from 15 of infinite context. I wonder if you have any perspective on this that's new. This is bit of an aside, but, obviously, intellectual property is, like, super valuable. We're in this general period of closing. You know, I'm hearing multiple reports of kind of less information sharing even within companies, which you sort of alluded to happening in various ways. And then I see a paper like InfiniAttention, if that's how they're pronouncing it, that was out of DeepMind recently where they show a really elegant it looks more like a state space or a state space kind of equivalent where there's this, like, fixed size element that is still, like, referred back to with attention, but is, like, constantly updated and can handle, in theory, like, up to infinite attention. And then there's, like, the the more recent sort of sliding window. I'm surprised that something like that gets published, and I wonder if you have any insight or perspective on why some things that still seem like they're, like, top notch IP are coming out despite this sort of broader closing of sharing.

Logan Kilpatrick: (23:57) It's an interesting question. A couple of reactions. One, I have no specific knowledge about this individual paper. Broadly, I would assume part of it is theater. I would assume part of it is wanting to give folks the credit that they deserve for doing some of this work, which is like an important of the scientific process. I think part of it is again, on the scientific process side, like folks wanting to get these ideas out when, and again, I don't know for this specific paper, if it's like this thing is verified and is like the clear path towards scaling to infinite context, if it's more of like, hey, here's an idea that might work and it's intended to like foster conversation with people in the ecosystem. I think there's a lot of reasons to publish stuff like that. And strategically for DeepMind, like, again, they need to attract the world's talent. There's a lot of academic talent that's out there that care about the stuff that's being published from a paper perspective. So I think there is an economic reason why it might make sense to to publish even if in some sense you have to give up some discovery and it's no longer a trade secret or or what have you. I think all of those things are at play. I would also not underestimate the value of or the reality of, like, what is actually new versus, like, someone has already figured out and, like, they know someone else has figured this thing out based on what someone said or specifically didn't say in another paper. So, like, it the the calculated calculus on this could be that it's clear to the DeepMind team that someone has already figured something else out that's very similar to this unless even though they haven't said it in this very specific way, it's not actually brand new, or it could be completely brand new. And they're like, this is the most incredible thing ever. We need to share it with the world. I I honestly don't know, but I think those are the things that I would think through if I was in that position.

Nathan Labenz: (25:45) Yeah. A lot of considerations to say the least. I try not to put too much stock into the rumor mill, but I had heard that the DeepMind team had some impressive results with state space model type work internally and hadn't published it. And then Mamba happened at the end of last year, and then maybe it was like, we might as well, bring this out. And I can also very well imagine that's not the best, you know, thing that Google has up its sleeve at this point as well.

Logan Kilpatrick: (26:12) Nathan, if I can impart anything on you, it's that the number of the rumors that are true is so small that it rounds down to zero. Most of the rumors that you read are totally nowhere close to reality. I don't know in this specific instance, but when I had some specific knowledge that people were rumoring about online at at OpenAI, and it was never true.

Nathan Labenz: (26:35) So I guess before returning back to Flash, which is definitely something I do wanna dig in on a bit because it is super impressive, How would you advise developers who are obviously trying to figure out what to build and, like, where to go? And they're trying to gauge, am I gonna get enabled by or steamrolled by the next generation of things coming out from the frontier developers? Should they be trying to zoom out and take, like, a higher level perspective? Or are there, like, trusted sources you would recommend? I mean, people are not gonna stop asking these questions. Right?

Logan Kilpatrick: (27:07) In the absence of something, you know, we're back to kind of the rumor mill. Right?

Nathan Labenz: (27:10) Yeah. It is important that folks continue to ask the questions. I think it's just worth considering and having a very skeptical take on all the different rumors, like really thinking about it from first principles. I think on the comment of like, what should developers be thinking about? What makes me excited about Gemini 1.5 flash to to give a little bit of context, you know, OpenAI released GPT-four March 2023. I was sitting with Greg in the weeks leading up to that launch and going over the demo that ultimately became the him drawing on the napkin and doing that whole experience. And I think when I first saw that happen and when I was playing around with the technology, I was like, oh, this is here and this is going to have an impact right now. And I think the very real reality is until, honestly, until Flash came out, the multimodal, natively multimodal whole echelon of vision use cases was not actually possible. I gave a talk at the AI engineering summit the middle of last year, and I said that 2024 was gonna be the year of multimodal models. And I think that's actually turning out to be 100% true. And again, the thing that gets me excited about this particular moment is the vision use cases were literally not possibly for across a couple of different axes, cost, latency. The most vision use cases actually turned out to be people's putting in a picture and saying like, tell me about what's happening in this specific location or where this specific object is or etcetera. Those are most vision use cases in production today. And again, those weren't possible before. Flash outputs actually, you can get the model to output a bounding box or multiple bounding boxes. So you can say, hey, where is this thing in this image? Tell me where it is. And that makes this whole like, there's so many custom image segmentation models that are out there. All this stuff around, like automating clicking through UIs and stuff like that, that were literally not possible for the model. Like the the vision models that were out there, the state of the art vision models had no understanding of the spatial relationship and how that act and, like, the coordinate plane of, like, where things were. And that's now possible. And also as somebody who invests in AI startups and and looks at this whole space very holistically, like, there's just so many new things that are going to be created because of the flash models when, like just as a fan of the technology, not even as again, it's hard to debias myself now being at Google. But, like, I I really do think that's it's this, like, very special moment that is not it's not actually super clear to me that, like, widely the developer community sees this opportunity partially because I think there was these huge expectations for all the vision use cases and, like, none of them have really panned out to any interesting degree. And I think that's, again, finally just starting to change.

Nathan Labenz: (30:02) Yeah. It is pretty amazing. The first thing that I've done with it that really impressed me, and I did go head to head on this with other frontier model developers offerings, was to the degree I could actually because I couldn't entirely do this. As listeners well know, I'm the AI adviser to this company Athena that's in the executive assistant space. We've talked many times about how we have worked on this onboarding process where they used to have a hour long onboarding call, and then somebody would spend 4 hours was the budgeted time to write up a profile of the person so that they could then hand that off to the assigned assistant that would work with this client and try to give them a a good running start to understand who the client is. That process has been largely AI ified. We still do the human to human call because that's good for eliciting the information, but then to actually transcribe, turn that into a profile, that's now all done with language models. But now we're thinking, well, what more could we do? Right? There's, a ton of information, of course, that's locked up in people's Gmail. Gmail is almost for sure and probably by a lot, the number one most adopted platform across all of our clients, and they all have just an unbelievable amount of, you know, data in there. And our assistants get access to it as well because that's a big part of how they're gonna help is, like, managing your inbox, managing your calendar. So I just tried pulling the most recent 250 emails that I personally had sent and just dumped them into a single context window with Flash and asked it to write a character sketch about me. Basically, no prompt engineering. Nothing like I didn't really even iterate on this much. And I was really impressed with what it was able to do. And this was it turned out with my email patterns, whatever idiosyncrasies I may have. 250 emails with the content replied to and forwarded or whatever the case may be. It was about 1000 tokens per email. So with this 250, I'm looking at, a quarter million tokens. That obviously exceeds the context window that are available from other providers. I could chunk it or whatever potentially as well, but I don't wanna have to do that. That sounds like work. So just dump the whole thing into Flash and got a really pretty impressive 2 page character sketch of me and my interest and what I'm involved with and, you know, covered the podcast, and it covered Athena, and it covered various other AI related things that I'm sending emails about. Overall, a really impressive experience. And that cost it actually took longer to get the emails out of the Gmail API than it took to run it through Flash. The whole thing took, like, a 3 to 4 minute time frame, but, like, 45 seconds of that was Flash. And the cost of it, if I understand the pricing correctly, I believe comes in under 20 cents at a quarter million tokens times the 70 cents. So that was definitely an eye opener where I was like, man, for a couple bucks, we can, like, really understand a client's whole, like, you know, many different facets of their life. Right? We're we're thinking about things like, can we go find every gift that they've ever given in their email history and pull out all the people that they should be thinking about giving gifts to? And the the assistant could be proactive perhaps about that. Or can we get all of your travel habits, you know, and every loyalty program number that you have and put that into a spreadsheet form? And it looks like this stuff is very possible and honestly not even that hard to do. It's crazy to think that even with GPT-four original, with the 8,000 tokens, I've joked that context window inflation is the best hyperinflation. That would handle 8 emails of my thousand tokens. Right? And that's before generating anything. So I could maybe get 7 in there or 6 or 5 depending on how long they were or whatever. And you think about the time and the cost and every once in a while would fail and the complexity of that. And life has just gotten so, so much easier for developers to get, like, a really good output back. Interestingly, that is not something that the Gmail integration will do yet. I asked it to do the same thing and just said into Gemini in Gmail, like, could you read my recent emails and write a character sketch of me? It said, like, it couldn't help with that. That's my story of Flash. Tell me a a story of yours or somebody else's that, you think is worth highlighting.

Logan Kilpatrick: (34:30) A couple of reactions to this. One, as an Athena customer, I'm glad that you're doing this work because it actually sounds incredibly useful for the assistance or just anyone trying to help someone with anything. The nuance and the very specific context matters so much. And I was using AI Studio and the Gemini API just to do drafts and and just taking different passes at the Gemini 1.5 technical reports. And doing exactly this of, hey. Pull out interesting insights from here. We should actually do a a live demo of asking some of the questions that you asked about, like, what makes this natively multimodal? You can just upload the PDF and ask. I probably have it sitting in my setup still, so I'm I'm curious if we can do that and see what happens. The other thread that came to my mind around this is I'm pretty sure that flash just passed GPT-four, the original GPT-four on the LMSYS leaderboard. And I'm curious if you can fact check me on that to see if that's true. The 03-14 version, which I think was the original. That model was $30 per million input tokens. And 1.5 flash version is now 35 cents for under 128k or and then 70 cents after that. For a model that's just as intelligent, for a model that is more capable and and I say all that not to compare these two, but also just, like, back to the thread of how should developers be thinking about this technology. Like, that trend is not going to stop. That trend of the models becoming faster, smarter, cheaper, more capable, being able to infuse even more AI into the products and services that people are building is going to be the path that we are very clearly on. And I was in another call earlier today and was talking about the tools and how people are using AI as a tool and how in many ways people are taking AI today and being like, oh, I'm going to put AI here and I'm going to put AI here and I'm going to put AI here. And the actual like future outcome of this technology is like the AI is going to be everywhere. Your product is going to have AI infused and AI is going to be one of the primary interfaces of interaction with your product. And not enough people, I think, are thinking to that order of magnitude and that level. Partially it's because the technology is not actually there yet. So I have empathy for that. But I think, like, having that in the back of your mind of what that world is going to look like and what is your specific product or services perspective in a world in which AI is everywhere and it is, as the saying goes, too cheap to meter intelligence. It'll be too cheap to meter because there's so many things that are being built with it. It's useful to think about. I think one the really quick comment about what I've seen people building with Flash, I would be really interested to see, and I I think I've seen some demos actually from folks who we were at IO with around, like, you know, what is an open Astra look like? Like, the demo that Google did and the DeepMind team did with putting on the the glasses and being able to ask questions. I think you could probably recreate a lion's share of that demo just using the 1.5 flash API and people were all talking about, oh, is Google Glass back? You can go buy that similar hardware like that just like off the shelf for probably a few $100 and either connect it to one of the Open Gemini models or connect it directly to the Gemini API and make that workflow work for yourself. So it'll be really interesting to see how that actually plays out. It's on my ever growing to do list to buy a pair of glasses like that and try it out and see if I can recreate the demo myself, like, just using the API. And again, my instinct is yes.

Nathan Labenz: (38:12) Hey. We'll continue our interview in a moment after a word from our sponsors.

Nathan Labenz: (38:12) Yeah. It seems like the if, like, in the immediate wake of GPT-four was sort of the agent's craze and then it was sort of, okay. Well, maybe not quite yet, but we can see where this is going. Now it seems like with the ability to watch the screen and for things to be cheap and low enough latency, it seems like the proactive coworker is the new thing where I'm seeing, like, a ton of that popping up, whether it's obviously, we've got the ChatGPT desktop app in limited rollout and Astra and Pietro made a demo at the airport, simple version, obviously. It was impressive to see how quickly he was able to put even a simple version of that together. What do the specs look like on that for I haven't benchmarked this extensively myself yet. But for Flash, how should people think about, like, time to first token and token per second type of metrics? Because, like, with the thing that I did with the 250 emails, 250,000 tokens, and it generated 2,000 in response, and that took, like, about 45 seconds. So that's, on the one hand, extremely fast. But on the other hand, probably I shouldn't put that much context into my like, it wouldn't be fast enough to do it, like, on a sort of proactive, suggestive basis. Are there any, like, rules of thumb or just guidelines for how fast we should think about these things as being given varying amounts of context?

Logan Kilpatrick: (39:48) Yeah. It's a good question. Latency continues to be a challenging thing to articulate to an external audience because there's so many confounding factors of like, what does latency actually mean? Like, the current load that the server is under affects latency and time to first token. Like it varies by day. There's historically across usage patterns, different times of the day have different peak loads, which then impacts latency. There are all these like weird effects. Back to the comment that I made earlier. I think this is actually something that I'm hopeful that LMSYS and in absence of LMSYS, I think somebody else should do this. Like how can we make a benchmark that is actually representative of all of these trade offs? Like, as me as a developer, as you as a developer, you're thinking about how to use this technology. How can we actually calculate into these benchmarks, not just the human preference scores, but also like what the cost is for 1000000 tokens and what the latency looks like and coming up with a scientific way to do that or even just a simple interface where like I as a developer can say, here you have 3 little sliders and the 2 things I care the most about are latency and cost. And you know what? Actually, intelligence doesn't matter that much to me or vice versa. Whatever the different axes are, letting you tweak those and getting some sort of output of, like, here's the model that I should be choosing based on those things, I think would actually be incredibly interesting to developers. And again, I'm biased, but I I don't think that the Elo scores for Flash are actually representative of how transformative it's going to be for developers because it's tied for like ninth or something like that, but it's also 10 times cheaper than a bunch of similarly capable models and also multimodal and also etcetera, etcetera. So it's really interesting to think about that. That's the thing that keeps ringing in my head. I I do think we probably need to put out a little bit more guidance around latency. My instinct is it's 3 times ish faster in a bunch of use cases that I've tried than Pro, but I've almost, like, fully moved over a bunch of my daily AI use to flash. And it it seems to be, like, just as capable in a lot of the use cases that I'm messing around with it on.

Nathan Labenz: (41:58) Yeah. That's interesting. The fact that you're doing that as a first go to is definitely pretty telling. The numbers for what it's worth are the ELO score for Flash right now is 1232, and that is just under 50 points ahead of GPT-four 03-14, the original. And it's funny. The the least popular GPT-four continues to be the June, of last year version, so it's like a full 70 points ahead of that. And it's only, like, 15 points behind the January version of GPT-four, which is, as you noted, more than 10 times more expensive, either, like, 30 times more expensive or, like, 12 times more expensive depending on whether you're above or below the the $128k. And just to be clear on how that works too, is it basically like it's a hard cutoff. Right? If I send in $127,009.99, I'm billed at the one rate and it's I tip over. I'm at that other rate. That sort of suggests I'm, like, using more hardware, I guess, is probably what's going on under the hood. Otherwise, I don't know why there would be a break point.

Logan Kilpatrick: (43:05) It it it is a hard cut off. I think the intent is actually more so to like, the cost of doing compute on higher numbers of tokens is not linear. Broadly, that's true. So I think this is more so trying to embody the reality of the costs associated with running these models, which is that it's a much higher cost to do some of those larger token requests. It just requires a lot more compute. Yeah. Take take that for what's worth. And then your comment about the 06-13 model. Yeah. We'll couple of years, we'll we'll get a blog poster, another podcast about why that model is slightly worse than all the other GPT-four models.

Nathan Labenz: (43:45) Interesting. Well, the world might be very different place by the time you're able to tell that story in full, but I look forward to it nonetheless. When you guys are building internally at Google, and I know you're not exactly doing this, but, like, the things that we saw Astra, for example, out of the labs group, are they basically building on the same thing that we as developers either are now able to build on or like soon will be able to build on? Is that basically a dogfooding exercise?

Logan Kilpatrick: (44:15) Yeah. Labs didn't build just to clarify, the DeepMind team has built the Astra project. Labs built a bunch of the cool stuff. Okay. I think there's, like, very specific circumstances where they might be, like, running their own stuff. But actually, most like, there's many thousands of internal teams that build directly on the Gemini API. Like, the same API that that we make available to developers is the same API that teams use. I think the the only delta, the reason why teams might not use those models out of the box is, like, they need some custom post training data that's not represented in the existing models that are available through the API. And, again, if that team has the muscle and the resources to go and do custom post training, then they might go and do that to make you can this is just a made up example, but, like, the maps team, if the model doesn't have enough maps data and for some reason there's a bunch of use cases that would require that, if they had the resources, they might go and build off of the base model and go and post train their own version for some specific use case.

Nathan Labenz: (45:15) Gotcha. Okay. Cool. So I'm interested to hear you know, you're stepping into a position here where competition is obviously fierce for the developer accounts, and there's, like, multiple dimensions to it. The models being certainly the primary one, than, like, what actual capabilities you can get at for what price. But the friction and the developer experience also definitely matters. I have will confess to having been confused certainly at times in terms of, like, where do I go for what within cloud versus Vertex versus AI Studio. If you actually have the Gemini 1.5 technical report loaded up and you wanna just do the walk through in the AI Studio, that would be a, I think, a useful exercise.

Logan Kilpatrick: (45:57) Let me switch over to my Gmail account, and then I'll do it from there.

Nathan Labenz: (46:03) Okay. Cool. So I can see your screen. And, yeah, maybe just give us a little bit of, like, context for what this is and how it relates to other flagship Google properties. I'm not clear on is this a sort of playground type of environment, but when I actually wanna go to production, I need to switch over to Vertex still, or what is the sort of overall developer journey that folks are supposed to go on and how does this fit into that?

Logan Kilpatrick: (46:32) Yeah, this is a great question. I'm glad that you asked that it is top of mind for me to simplify this and make sure that it's abundantly clear to developers. I think having to talk about it is a great reminder that we have a lot of work to do in this space. Broadly, if you are somebody who knows that you need an enterprise cloud solution, that is what Vertex is for. If you for whatever the constraint is, whether it's like a legal regulatory privacy, you need some specific SOs, you need whatever, you need to have some legal agreement signed because of the context of your business. All of those things are like traditional things that an enterprise cloud provider would do, and you can get all of those things from Vertex. And I think it's the right place to go if you need those things. If you're just a developer who's like, I need to build AI into my startup, I want to use Flash. I want to use 1.5 Pro. There's two things that you need to be aware of. One, AI Studio is sort of the interface to get started with this technology. You can do a bunch of prompting, which we'll do here in this UI. It's essentially just a playground. You can get your API key. You can do a couple of other things like make a tuned model, which you can also do through the API. So this is where you would get started with the technology. You can also just go to ai.google.dev where our developer documentation lives. Again, you'll still need to use AI Studio to grab an API key for the API. But you can go to production. You can scale in production. We support, like, again, similar the the mental model that I give to people is, like, there was OpenAI and there was Azure OpenAI for us. We have the Gemini API and then we also have the Gemini API available in Vertex, which is our enterprise cloud solution. So you can choose either of those. There's very real reasons you would wanna use either. For most developers using enterprise cloud solutions, there's a bunch of friction involved for good reason. So they tend to go with the less friction option, which is in our case, AI Studio and the Gemini API.

Nathan Labenz: (48:25) Gotcha. Cool. So for most people, if you don't have a special requirement, you don't even have to concern yourself with Vertex.

Logan Kilpatrick: (48:32) Correct. Yeah. Unless, again, unless you have a specific need for an enterprise cloud solution, like, I I don't think that you you can get pretty much everything you need directly out of the box with AI Studio, the Gemini API. Gotcha. Okay. Yeah. And yeah. So we're in AI Studio. Again, simple prompt interface. I put in the Gemini 1.5 technical report, 115,000 tokens. And we were talking before about natively multimodal. Can you tell me what makes Gemini 1.5 natively multimodal?

Logan Kilpatrick: (49:11) Does that even mean? And we can go and find out and we'll see what happens in a couple of seconds. The document you provide doesn't explicitly state what makes Gemini 1.5 natively multimodal. Interesting. And and this is exactly what I would have expected. Yeah. I think that it it doesn't talk about the architecture.

Nathan Labenz: (49:31) While this is not really intended to be like a place that people come for regular use of the models, I actually have found it to be useful in a couple scenarios. I find it to be remarkable that it's not easier to set up a template with a long doc just loaded fully into context. When the GPTs first launched, it was like, okay, great. Now I can put my whole code base in there. But then I would do that and then it would try to search through it, not load enough stuff in, and then miss things. And I was like, okay. But I actually just want you to read the whole code base and because I know you can't, you have enough room for that, but it wasn't really designed for that. Claude, I still doesn't have that as, like, a template setting. And, actually, this is, like, one of the few places where you can come and just have a preset prompt that has a few docs. I have a a couple template prompts in my own AI Studio. One of them is, like, 20 different mixture of experts papers. I was trying to get a handle on what is up with mixture of experts. Notably, I think it is stated that this is a mixture of experts architecture that we're that we're working with here, and that's obviously become standard frontier at this point. So just trying to get a handle on that, it was like, I'm gonna have probably however many rounds of back and forth on this to try to educate myself and just loading in those 20 papers. And it's funny. Like, that's a pain in the butt, but the ability to just save that here as a preset is actually pretty useful and has me coming back to it occasionally as, like, a retail customer even though that's not something I'm, like, trying to productize.

Logan Kilpatrick: (51:07) Yeah. It it is interesting. I think part of the context is that the AI Studio product has, like, the DNA and the roots actually in the consumer. It was originally called mobile or maker suite, and it was about, like, building automation flows and things like that. And it ultimately got transformed into AI Studio, which is the sort of playground product. But I think a lot of the initial DNA was more of a consumer product, which is interesting. And I think very clearly the direction that we're pushing in is, like, towards a developer product. But I do think that part of the magic of this is like and and actually to your comment about email is like something that we've thought about about, like, ultimately, we want people to be able to see that this technology is useful. So being able to import a bunch of your emails and use Gemini directly through this interface has a potential to be really useful to people. I think the balance to strike is like, we don't wanna make this too much of a consumer product. Like, ultimately, what matters is developers building stuff with the API. So we don't wanna over incentivize people to come to AI Studio and do all their AI workflows directly inside AI Studio.

Nathan Labenz: (52:11) It would be quite the, accident of history if that continued to be the thing. Let's do a couple rapid fire ones. Let's do it. Okay. Just road map then. The Vio, should we expect that to be kind of a slow rollout a la Sora, or is that something folks will actually be able to build into products in the, like, not distant future?

Logan Kilpatrick: (52:31) It's a really good question, and I honestly don't have the answer. My expectation is that the the tooling is actually pretty robust that, part of video effects that the labs team and other contributors have built. So I'm not 100% sure on what the rollout looks like, but it it seems like a very distinctly different product slash rollout strategy than Sora from my understanding and from hearing, Josh talk about it.

Nathan Labenz: (52:59) Okay. Cool. I'm on the wait list. If you could put in a good word for me, that one is definitely a priority at Waymark. How about on the rounding out the the suite of tools a little bit? Obviously, as you well know, OpenAI has the assistance API that kind of brings an integrated RAG component as well as, like, a tool use thing into a single product. As far as I know, there's not like a RAG element. There is tool use, but it doesn't seem like it's been emphasized very much. So what's the future of those things? Will there be like a packaged up version?

Logan Kilpatrick: (53:34) Yeah. We have function calling right now. We we have a bunch of improvements that we need to make on function calling, so you could imagine, like, a function calling v2 coming. Yep. I I say v2 just to emphasize that we'll make updates to it. It's not clear, like, what how substantial those changes will be if it's just, like, improving the accuracy of the model like function calling or or what that will look like. We actually do have in the Gemini API today, a semantic retrieval API that's been built in, which took a bunch of work. So you can upload a bunch of documents into a corpus and then do semantic retrieval on top of that. I think we're we're still early in our thinking about what that product will look like. It's not clear that the current design and and what we've built is, like, the thing that we'll keep running with long term, but I think it's been useful to look at that. On the Vertex side, they have a agent builder flow, which allows you to do a few more of these use cases a little bit more robustly, and we don't offer that yet. But I think it's possible we might take what they learn on the Vertex side and and bring some of that over into the Gemini API as well.

Nathan Labenz: (54:32) Okay. Cool. That's interesting. What about fine tuning? I know there are, like, some things that can be fine tuned. Like, what can be fine tuned? I can't fine tune, like, 1.5 Pro, can I?

Logan Kilpatrick: (54:42) You can't fine tune 1.5 Pro, but on Thursday, we'll announce or coming on May 30. So maybe after this video is released, a 1.5 flash fine tuning will be available. And I think we have such an interesting value proposition with flash in that you don't pay more cost for inference and you don't pay to train. So it makes it this, like, very unique value proposition that actually, again, nobody else is offering right now, which is really exciting to me. So not no pro tuning yet, but flash tuning will be announced. Not fully rolled out, but announced on Thursday.

Nathan Labenz: (55:18) Wow. Okay. That's interesting. Should we think of that as the same I think fine tuning is, like, very much a a point of confusion. Right? Like, for I tried at one point trying to fine tune OpenAI models to write as me. That turned out to be not viable. Currently, best write as me solutions, one, I would say is probably Claude Opus, and I should try again with the latest date stamp of Gemini 1.5 Pro because that was the thing up until Opus. But, like, how should we think about fine tuning? My general rule of thumb is, like, if you're narrowing in on a task, you you can use fine tuning to dial in exactly how you want it to behave for a specific task, but then you have to make sure that you're controlling inputs and outputs effectively. You lose the generality. If you want to do something sort of ad hoc, like write as me, summarize all these documents or whatever, there you're probably just better context stuffing. How would you refine my understanding of that?

Logan Kilpatrick: (56:15) Yeah. I think this when I was between Google and OpenAI, I give a serious thought into making a startup around this problem, this like write as me problem. Because I think the real challenge is you can get pretty far with fine tuning. The problem is it's like a traditional machine learning problem to actually make sure that you have a representative dataset that's balanced and focused on the right things. And it's like, you're probably actually capable of doing this. But I think broadly, the market of people who are going to figure out do the right experiments, figure out how to actually make this work is, like, a very small subsection of people. So my my guess on

Nathan Labenz: (56:54) Low rank fine tuning. I'm not sure it's even really super possible. It seems like facts are just really hard. So it seems like you need some sort of retrieval help probably anyway.

Logan Kilpatrick: (57:07) I think it's both of those things. And I also think it's like synthetic data magnification, stuff like that. Like a lot of people just don't have enough content to actually like, you need more examples to make the model really good at what it is and, like, being really thoughtful about what you're doing with fine tuning versus what you're doing with RAG.

Nathan Labenz: (57:26) Yeah. Okay. That was definitely tricky. I'm not sure if I'm capable of it or not. I maybe gave up too soon, but I didn't succeed. So time will tell. Okay. You had said a while back, this was back in the OpenAI era, OpenAI is only as good as its latest model. And that has stuck with me because it really suggests that the competition has potential for a winner take all dynamic because it is like pretty easy to switch between models in many cases. You gotta re prompt engineer, but it's it's a pretty simple swap in a lot of cases. How would you characterize the state of competition amongst the frontier developers today? And, like, how much are you guys thinking about each other and trying to time your announcements to scoop each other? What's the real vibe as you guys are competing in this world news because our last model situation?

Logan Kilpatrick: (58:19) I have an enormous amount of respect for Sam. I'm not sure that I agree with the I never think about competition piece of it. I think people are like very aware of how much competition there is. So it wasn't yeah. I I was not aligned with that. I think to me, something that has become abundantly clear is that the we're not going to end up in a winner take all situation. I think the players in the market understand how much of an opportunity there is with this technology, how transformative it is. If anything, I think that has pushed even more people who normally wouldn't compete in this space to compete in this space, which I think is a net benefit for everyone, especially with where open source is and how many people are pushing from a frontier lab perspective. It's super exciting to be a part of. And I would actually expect that like even more people are going to end up competing as they finally wrap their head around how big of an opportunity there is here.

Nathan Labenz: (59:14) Interesting. That's quite contrary actually to my expectation. I feel like we're seeing the second tier of foundation model developers, like, getting thinned out right around now. And I'd expect that there will be a couple Chinese champions. There might be, like, an Indian champion. Like, Mistral might be, like, the champion of Europe. But I think we're headed for 10, maybe, companies that could make a credible case that they're at at or near the frontier. You think it'll be more than that?

Logan Kilpatrick: (59:44) I think it's hard to know the specific number, but my guess is just because of how much value is, could be accrued that like a lot of people, like anyone with any amount of technical understanding and sufficient resources is going to go and do this. And there's a lot of people who don't have enough sufficient resources and they'll go do open source and that will continue to push open source even closer to the frontier. So I'm hopeful that we'll end up in some really nice symbiosis. And I think for like people betting on taking the entire market to be successful, I think it's not likely to be the best outcome for those companies. And I think there's a lot of businesses where they just need to make a great model for it to be an incredibly valuable thing for their business. I think that's actually positive.

Nathan Labenz: (1:00:33) Okay. Another recent tweet that really caught my attention was your tweet saying that if AGI were here today, people wouldn't know what to do with it. And I'd love to hear more about what you mean by that. Because I feel like I would know what to do with it, or least I think I would. If it's an AGI that is literally like if we're talking, you know, can outperform humans at most economic work and it's highly autonomous, what are people not gonna get about that? Or am I using the wrong definition? Or please explain.

Logan Kilpatrick: (1:00:58) No. I I think you, of all people, would know what to do with it because I think you're positioned in this ecosystem in a in a very particular way. I think that the commentary was more that like, again, continuing to hit on this story of like, most people still have never even used GPT-four. Most people have never used Gemini 1.5. Like most people haven't used this technology. So everyone thinks that there's going to be the singularity. Like if someone gave me AGI right now on my computer and I can access it through an API or an interface, Time in which it'll take for the world to change is like very long. The world is a big place. There's a lot of things that are going to happen, but also the sort of conversation with Connor who was also at IO and I don't know if you got to a chance to chat with him, but he's incredible. I love Connor so much. And he gets to spend his time, like, thinking about how can we empower people who don't have any technical background to really leverage this technology and understand how to build with it. And I think it's, like, such a powerful message because, again, most of the world is not technical. Most of the world doesn't really care about this technology. It's more about, like, how they can use it as a tool.

Nathan Labenz: (1:02:06) That maybe suggests sort of where you would direct people on the developer side in terms of opportunity. Going back to earlier in the conversation, said one of the great workflows is just turning on meeting assistant in Google Meet, and it will take notes and assign to dos and whatever. Of course, there are like a dozen startups that are competing for that niche as well. I came away honestly from IO feeling like, man, the platforms have such incredible economies of scale. They've got the distribution. They can, like, afford to build a lot of things in for free. Obviously, Meta's put, like, everything free. GPT-four o is free. I don't not even I pay for Google so I'm not sure what I'm getting for free or not. But, like, certainly, there's, like, ability to put stuff in for free. How do you think developers should be strategizing for what opportunities they can pursue that, like, Google won't pursue, or can they out execute? It seems like distribution is gonna be a really hard uphill battle for any of these, like, meeting note takers going forward. Right? But it wasn't that long ago that would have been considered like a frontier, like, oh my god. Like, yeah, Google's not gonna do this anytime soon. But I'm old enough to remember those days and they weren't that long ago. So how do I stay ahead of that wave and not get crashed over by that wave?

Logan Kilpatrick: (1:03:24) I think the distribution piece is definitely one of the advantages that larger companies have over startups. I think the real reality for startups, and I felt this myself now having sat in many different seats in my life is like, there are so many inherent advantages to startups, which, you know, now being in a large company again, like I would beg to have those things as advantages. Again, the fact that you can have a very small focused group of people who are just going to go and execute and build and do that. And you don't need to, you know, every additional, however many people you have introduces and again, additional amount of coordination overhead. And if I was sitting in a startup today, I would be smiling with my grin extremely wide thinking about how I can go and compete against some of the large companies that are out there because there's just so much opportunity in the ecosystem. There's so much to be built. There's so many new things that were not possible before that are now possible with LLMs. I think the important thing is, again, it's very possible that all the meeting notes takers are going to do really well. I think they're they're actually incredibly well positioned to become one of the first agent slash assistance that like actually help you go and do work. Like they're in the meeting, they have the context. Like having the context is like half the battle. I'm not only in Google Meets, but I think there's a lot of people who are across many different platforms across teams and Zoom and Meet and other things. Being able to have a tool that maybe does all those things is incredibly useful. So there's a lot of different edges. And again, the value isn't in just doing the integration and taking the notes, but like also in what you do after that and how much you can automate away. Like, if for some reason I had a system that was able to draft up a bunch of emails after a meeting and say, here, let me go and ping these people for you, and I can just go and check, check, and send those emails off. That's a distinctly different competitive advantage than what's being provided today. So there's always more that can be done. And I think again, as I've said this many times in different places, there's never been a better time to be a startup building in this space than right now, this technology, like everything is up for grabs.

Nathan Labenz: (1:05:37) Well, I think that's a great concluding note. You wanna share anything else that we didn't get to?

Logan Kilpatrick: (1:05:41) Yeah. I'm on Twitter. Folks can get ahold of me there and see all the things that I'm thinking and sharing. And I'm appreciative of you having me on for a second time, Nathan. This was ton of fun. Hopefully, I'll see you sooner than Google IO next year.

Nathan Labenz: (1:05:54) Looking forward to it. Logan Kilpatrick, thank you for being part of the Cognitive Revolution.

Logan Kilpatrick: (1:05:59) I love it. Thanks for having me.

Nathan Labenz: (1:06:01) It is both energizing and enlightening to hear why people listen and learn what they value about the show. So please don't hesitate to reach out via email at tcr@turpentine.co, or you can DM me on the social media platform of your choice.

 Published in:
 Episode

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
