# The Great AI Implementation with Raza Habib of Humanloop
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/the-great-ai-implementation-with-raza-habib-of-humanloop/
# Date: 2023-04-27
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

Transcript

Raza Habib: (0:00) RLHF is like sex in high school. Everyone's talking about it, but almost no one's actually doing it.

Nathan Labenz: (0:05) I'm not a connoisseur of too many things in life, but one that I might claim connoisseurship of is AI analogies.

Raza Habib: (0:11) I'm very optimistic about the rate of progress. I kept making predictions—I thought, oh, that will take this many years—and again and again, I've been beaten down to the point that I've learned this progress seems to be happening a lot faster than most might expect. I already have a prosthesis. It's my phone, and I'm glued to it all the time. So it's only one step further. But I'd want to be confident that I'm not opening up literally my brain to some advertiser model. Spending time in an interactive environment gives you a much better intuition for the capabilities of the models than just looking at benchmarks or numbers on test sets. Obviously, those quantitative measures are valuable and important, but you gain something qualitative and different through interactive, almost play with the models that I think is hard to gain if you haven't just spent some time with them.

Nathan Labenz: (1:05) Yeah. Preach. Hello, and welcome to the Cognitive Revolution, where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs, and builders working on the frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week, we'll explore their revolutionary ideas and together we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work, life, and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz, joined by my cohost Erik Torenberg. Before we dive into the Cognitive Revolution, I want to tell you about my new interview show, Upstream. Upstream is where I go deeper with some of the world's most interesting thinkers to map the constellation of ideas that matter. On the first season of Upstream, you'll hear from Marc Andreessen, David Sacks, Balaji, Ezra Klein, Joe Lonsdale, and more. Make sure to subscribe and check out the first episode with a16z's Marc Andreessen. The link is in the description. Hi, friends. Our guest today is Raza Habib. Raza has a PhD in machine learning from University College London, during which time he also worked at Google AI as a research intern. But at present, he's on the front lines of LLM implementation as the CEO of HumanLoop, a Y Combinator-backed startup that helps companies of all kinds, small and large, across a wide range of industries, bridge the gap from API access to successful LLM deployment. Like many things, but even more so, LLMs are easy to learn but hard to master. It may take just a few minutes to get a starter prompt working reasonably well, but for companies looking to build LLMs into their products or to use them to automate internal processes, most of the work remains in the form of capturing and studying data, collecting user feedback to identify failure modes, monitoring performance on an ongoing basis, and running experiments to quantify and compare LLM performance. In my experience, it's more extreme than 80-20, maybe more like 90-10 or even 95-5. HumanLoop exists to make this process easier. Now, full disclosure, I am a HumanLoop customer, but there was no sponsorship or other consideration attached to this interview. I simply wanted to hear what Raza has learned in the process of helping so many different companies on their LLM implementation journeys. And he did not disappoint. As you'll hear, he shared a bunch of concrete examples of customer use cases, practical challenges that people are facing, and the strategies that they're using to overcome them. If you're a regular listener to the show, first, thank you. I continue to be amazed by all the great feedback we receive, and I'm always honored when someone tells me that they heard about the show from a friend. But second, over the last few shows with Riley Goodside, the world's first staff prompt engineer, and also Alex Albert, the creator of jailbreakchat.com, you've now got a pretty good overview of hands-on LLM use and of prompting in particular. So with that in mind, if you'd like to test your own prompting skill or nurture your inner red teamer, you might be interested to participate in the upcoming Hack a Prompt competition. This is a beginner-friendly competition that challenges users to trick the AI into saying specific things. I'm a big believer in the importance of such crowdsourced testing, and for me, it's actually quite fun to mess around with AI models in this way. So I encourage you to check it out, either by searching Hack a Prompt 2023 or using the link which we'll have in the show notes. This competition is sponsored by a who's who of AI companies, including HumanLoop, and there are some $40,000 worth of cash and AI credit prizes available. The competition begins on May 5 and will run for three weeks, after which we'll have the organizer, Sander Schulhoff, who is also the creator of learnprompting.org, on the show as a guest to talk about the results. Now, without further ado, I hope you enjoy this conversation with Raza Habib. Raza Habib, welcome to the Cognitive Revolution.

Raza Habib: (5:21) It is a pleasure to be here. Thank you, Nathan.

Nathan Labenz: (5:23) Yeah, super excited about this. This is, as we were just talking, a bridge from our prompting week to our medical week coming up. You are the founder and CEO of HumanLoop, a Y Combinator company that is building tools to help people maximize the value that they get from language models. Just looking at your website: find the prompts users love and fine-tune custom models for higher performance at lower cost. So I really am excited to just dive in with you and look at what are people doing today? How's it going? What are the struggles? What are the tools that you're building to help them overcome those struggles? And obviously, we can get into where we're going in the near future as well. But for starters, just tell us a little bit about your customer base and your business.

Raza Habib: (6:14) Yeah, absolutely. I think you're exactly right. HumanLoop is there to try and help developers and founders build products with large language models, to bridge that gap between here's access to this really smart API to a model and actually turning that into a useful, usable product. And it turns out that there are many steps along that path. It's not as straightforward as it might seem at first. So our customer base tends to be developers, founders at startups, increasingly, actually, founders at larger startups. We keep getting messages from the CTO of reasonably large companies being like, don't tell anyone, but me and two others have been working on this side project for the last three months, and we think it might change everything. Can you help? But predominantly, it's people who are technical, who are looking to take the API and build a useful product with it. Those are our customer base, and the use cases are really broad. We've got people doing coding assistance and code generation. We've got marketing copy generation. We have slightly more rogue use cases—disclaimer, Nathan is one of our customers—and he uses it as part of a workflow automation tool. So there's a wide range of applications that we see, but a core thread of workflows and problems that people face, which typically are, at the early stage, a lot of experimentation and prototyping. Large language models are stochastic. They require instructions, finding the right prompts, figuring out how do I mold my problem into a format the models can understand. Evaluation is another big key problem area people have. The tasks that people are trying to do right now are much more subjective than you might have done in the past. And so trying to understand if I generate an email or if I'm doing marketing copy or writing a job description, what does good look like and understanding how to monitor that at scale is a challenge. And then customization and improvement. The models make things up. They don't know about company private data. So how do I get the model to understand my context, my company, be customized to my users? Those are the three big problem areas that we see people having and that we help them solve.

Nathan Labenz: (8:24) Molding the problem to a format that the AI can solve, I think that's such a huge concept that people who have tried ChatGPT are not quite reckoning with yet in terms of the depth and really the degree to which problems can be fit to a format that AIs can solve them. The other thing that drew me there is it sounds like a lot of your customers are building for themselves. How would you break it down right now between customers of yours that are building applications that they're offering commercially to third-party users versus folks—you mentioned the CTO—and it is fascinating that at the executive level, these tools are so accessible that where a lot of these leaders probably haven't coded all that much for a while, they can still dive in.

Raza Habib: (9:17) Yeah. It's interesting. I won't name names, but it's companies you would have heard of, and it's usually the CTO plus two or three really strong engineers. And they're trying to figure out what the limits are. We know some examples. So HubSpot, Dharmesh was actually in the room with his engineers trying to figure out how to make this stuff work, and there's many examples like that. I guess it's a spectrum. So the larger the company, the more likely it is they're building for themselves. Big companies come to us and they want to do two things. They want to build applications or they want to add LLM or AI features to their products, and they also want to automate internal processes. Those are the two areas. And then smaller companies tend to be building products with third parties. So if it's a startup, it's almost certainly using the LLMs as part of their product. If it's a large enterprise, you see a bit of both.

Nathan Labenz: (10:03) Yeah, interesting. Thinking a lot about just the mode of human-AI interaction or the various modes, and I'm working on this framework, which I keep adding dimensions to. But I think the first dimension that I think the most about is real-time copilot-style, ChatGPT-style interaction, where you are doing your thing and the AI is helping you. And then on the other extreme of that axis, we have highly structured workflows that have designed architecture of routing information in such a way that you can take advantage of AI capabilities as one step or multiple steps within automated workflows.

Raza Habib: (10:53) And maybe it's worth giving a concrete example of each of those just to help people hang their hats on. So on the one end, you might have something like GitHub Copilot that's sitting over your shoulder. It's watching the code as you write, and it's generating suggestions for what you might have. It's quite open-ended. On the other end, you have something like Copy.ai where you put in a set of bullet points and you hit a button and it generates you marketing copy, and you have very little parameters for control as the end user. Or ChatGPT maybe lives on the end closer to Copilot as well, something very open-ended that you can interact with and get very different outcomes.

Nathan Labenz: (11:29) So it's interesting that you have both. And if I understood correctly, it's the startups that tend to be building some sort of more opinionated view on essentially a language model service, and they're using your tools to try to figure out how to make that perform well for the uninitiated, right? The person that's not super AI-savvy. And then is it a spectrum or do you see it as more of a binary where the other side is, okay, I want to potentially automate first-line responses to email tickets in my CS system?

Raza Habib: (12:12) It's a good question. I think it's all about the user experience, and it's about thinking about different types of UX that work for AI or that work for LMs. If you look at the breakout successes, GitHub Copilot and ChatGPT being by far and away the biggest, but there are others, Copy AI, Writer, and a whole bunch of other things, if you look at those 2, Copilot and ChatGPT, very different novel UXs, but I think they're successful because they've cracked some kind of UX insight as well as a modeling insight. In the case of ChatGPT, I think the reason it's so much more accessible and so much more appealing to people than the original OpenAI models that were accessible through the playground is that the interface is fault tolerant by design. If you go to interact with something in chat and it doesn't get it exactly right the first time, you don't immediately give up. You're in a conversation with someone. You don't expect it to be perfect the first time. Whereas the original UI that OpenAI exposed in the playground, which was this text box that you put text in, you hit enter, I think a lot of people bounced off that without giving it the time to discover its boundaries. They would come, they would put something in, and it didn't work first time, and they would go, this is crap, it doesn't work. I think the model was a lot better. Let's not pretend that GPT 3.5 wasn't significantly better. But I do think that part of what makes those chat experiences work so well and be so popular for people is they're very fault tolerant, and they give you a chance to correct the model and have a few tries to get what you want. There's just a spectrum of different UX experimentation going on right now. In some cases, you don't want someone to have to think about the fact that they're interacting with an AI model. They have a job to be done, and you want to give them the shortest path to achieving that job. So it makes sense to put a lot of rails on it. In other cases, you need more complexity, more generality. You're trying to answer a complicated question or solve a research problem or whatever it might be. Chat makes a lot more sense. In the GitHub Copilot case, latency was super important. Having a chat type interface requires context switching. It requires some way of knowing the code you're looking at, and it takes a long time to get a response from these larger models. Whereas having a model that sits over your shoulder, can see your code, knows your context, and just occasionally makes a suggestion turns out to be really useful. So I guess my mental model isn't a binary spectrum from everything's on Rails to everything's free. It's more we're exploring this space of quite novel user experiences. We're at the very early stages of doing this for AI models, and we're starting to discover some of the things that work and don't work.

Nathan Labenz: (14:53) Do you see the human loop toolset as inherently more geared toward the narrow, guided use cases? It seems to me that's probably what more of your customers are focused on as opposed to the much more open ended free form experience?

Raza Habib: (15:17) I think there's some truth to that for sure. It's people who are trying to figure out how do I build a particular feature or a product and do that in a way that's robust and has reliable results. I guess there are 2 parts to it. There's the prototyping playground type environment that I think lends itself a lot to customization, but there are also these tools around understanding how well is my model working? What is it actually doing? Is it performing well? Understanding the inputs and outputs and the data that flows through, which is infrastructure that you're going to need irrespective of the generality of the problem. And in some cases, the more complex or more free rein you give the model, the more important it is to understand how well it's working and where it's breaking and where it isn't.

Nathan Labenz: (15:59) Let's maybe take a minute and just run down the product and what it is because I think that's also a great way to think about all the challenges that people are encountering. As you mentioned, I'm a customer of HumanLoop in my capacity as an advisor at Athena, which is in the executive assistant services space. And we're trying to figure out, and it's a target rich environment, what are all the things we can use, especially now at GPT-4 quality. There are so many applications. And interestingly, 1 of the things we're noticing is a lot of them don't even take that much prompt engineering to work, especially if we have a literal human in the loop, which for now we always do. When I was thinking, Okay, I need something like HumanLoop, I went out shopping and I was thinking, Okay, I want a neutral playground because as much as I do think OpenAI is awesome, I don't want to be entirely locked into them. I definitely want to be able to flip over and try Claude and stuff. I also really want to keep the history of my usage, which was something that OpenAI is really moving away from with their We don't keep any of your history, 30 day and delete kind of policy. It's kind of the opposite of what I was looking for, because we have 1000 executive assistants working in all these different contexts. We want to be able to see and know what are they doing and how is it working? Can we coach them? Can we detect patterns? There's so much for us to learn about just our own operations there. So I was really looking for history, looking for a way to graduate from a playground interactive exploration type experience to something that I could then build into workflow. So I wanted the flip from the playground to the API mode, which you guys offer. And then I hadn't even gotten into all the advanced features yet in terms of running experiments and collecting feedback. It was those first anchor things that led me to you. Comment on those kind of features as much as you'd like. And then I really want to get into what is the frontier for me, which is this feedback experiments and tools as well, which you have available too.

Raza Habib: (18:14) We saw this repeated pattern of basically people struggling with the complexity of managing a lot of different versions of prompts and trying things out and it being highly experimental. And also, knowledge being built up through that experimentation. When people do prompt engineering and they interact with the models, they start to implicitly build up intuitions about what does and doesn't work. And then that knowledge was being split between the OpenAI Playground and Excel spreadsheets and in GitHub code, and there wasn't an easy way to manage the prompt experimentation and that experience. And so that's part of what you've been using very heavily, which is we have something that looks a little bit like the OpenAI Playground. There's a chat version and a completion version, but it's multi provider. And it also has a few other key differences, which is it allows you to map the same model across multiple inputs simultaneously. And this is a key thing when you're trying to develop something that's going to work not just for the 1 instance you're looking at right now, but you're trying to see, Okay, is this going to work in general and robustly? Maybe you don't look at a huge test set all at once, but at least having 10 or 20 use cases that you can say, okay, I'm going to prototype a sales generating email, or I'm going to prototype something, and I'm going to test it out on all these different inputs and make sure it at least works for those. And so we see this sort of interactive environment where people will be creating a prompt template and then trying it out on a lot of different things at the same time and seeing how well does that work. And they typically then graduate from there, as you said, to deploying that as an API endpoint and using it in production or as part of a product. And at that point, I think the core challenges are how do I go from quite good performance to robust and good enough that I trust this in production? And even upstream of that, how do I even know if it's working? Because these things are so subjective. It's really difficult to understand those bits. And so I think that's when human loop really comes into its own. The early prototyping parts are best in class, and people use them. I think they add a ton of value. But in the journey of going from idea to robust deployed application, being able to understand how well things are working and to take actions to improve them, that's the really critical component.

Nathan Labenz: (20:30) Could you run down a handful of actual tasks? I'd love to just hear a parade of across different types of businesses, different sectors, what are the sort of object level

Raza Habib: (20:42) So early on, the majority of people, I think when GPT-3 came out, were doing writing assistance of some form. This was the first, obviously is the first thing people think of. So you have marketing writing assistance, sales writing assistance, fiction, etcetera. Companies like PseudoWrite, Copy AI, Jasper, etcetera, different varieties of I want to overcome this blank page problem, and I want to write more quickly and better. And there's a whole range of use cases there. Then you have people doing various forms of knowledge work automation. So you have a lot of different legal use cases, people doing contract review, summarization, question answering, extracting things from documents. That's another very large bucket that we see a lot of usage in. Then various forms of process automation. We mentioned sales email writing, but within sales, there's just a lot of mundane tasks that people do. I have a meeting. I have the transcript. I need a summary. I need to populate this in my CRM, etcetera. So there are a lot of people, I think, building in that space. We see a lot of use cases in the medical domain, typically around just removing some of the grunt work. So doctors have to do a significant amount of paperwork around insurance claims and filling out forms in the right way and summaries and things like that. So we've seen quite a few companies building in that space. Code writing is another 1. GitHub Copilot is just 1 of many different ways you might try and build code assistance. And so we've seen a few varieties of those, whether that's people doing natural language to SQL so that business analysts can query their own databases, or it might be people building an entirely new IDE from the ground up. 1 of our companies is a company called Cursor, and they're trying to reimagine what would an IDE look like if I started with an LLM on day 1? And that's another use case. And I could go on. There are so many applications being built now. There's a real Cambrian explosion.

Nathan Labenz: (22:31) Yeah, that's amazing. How do you even think about characterizing all of those tasks in terms of the impact that they make on people? Do you think of them in terms of minutes saved, doing it manually or as a human versus the LLM obviously takes whatever its latency is, then you have some review overhead. What's your framework for that?

Raza Habib: (23:00) That's a great question. I don't know if I have a framework, but I can tell you off the cuff what comes to mind, which is it feels to me that there's sort of the V naught version of using AI or LLMs, which is I'm going to use this to do an existing task a little bit faster or to automate something that someone was already doing. This is the version that I think teachers worry about. This is the sort of cheats on exam version. It lets me do what I was doing before but a bit better or a bit faster. And I think there's the interesting version, which is I now have an assistant that lets me do things I couldn't do before or to push what I was able to do a little bit further. And here, I think of some of the more advanced coding tools as being really interesting. So I've seen quite a few examples now of people using languages they're not familiar with because the coding assistant is good enough that they can move across code base. So I've seen, I've been speaking to friends who maybe would be back end engineers but have found themselves able to contribute a bit more elsewhere. Or I've got a tool myself that I built for personal use where when I'm taking notes, it tries to critique and extend what I'm writing. So it's not actually taking a set of bullet points and filling it out, but it's doing something more like what a colleague or friend might do of being, have you thought about this? And I feel like that actually allows me to do things I wouldn't have been able to do on my own. So there's a bit of a spectrum. I'm personally more excited about the tools that give people more capabilities than they would have had previously, but I think there's a lot of value in both. There are large cost centers. 1 of our customers is doing a huge amount of customer service automation. They've got several 100,000 customers, and so customer success is a big cost sink for them. Being able to accelerate those people and reduce headcount there is obviously valuable. On the other hand, you have customers who are augmenting lawyers where it's less about reducing headcount and more about letting the same person do the work better and leverage the tools in that way.

Nathan Labenz: (24:51) Is it a particular tool that you use for the critique of writing?

Raza Habib: (24:55) I built my own.

Nathan Labenz: (24:57) If it's something I could try, I'd be interested in trying it. If it's too bespoke, then maybe it's hard to share. But that sounds really interesting. I have not had a lot of success with the writing tools on the market today, but mostly I'll just ask for a little bit of help clarifying and simplifying from GPT-4 directly. But that does sound like an interesting UI or UX maybe is a better level at which to think about that.

Raza Habib: (25:28) Yeah, it's interesting. I think it depends what you're looking for. And I think a lot of the early success of writing assistants in the marketing space are around getting to either brainstorming, come out with more ideas, or they're about volume of not necessarily super high quality content. You're not trying to write something...

Nathan Labenz: (25:47) Yeah, you're throwing it all into an optimizer anyway.

Raza Habib: (25:50) Yeah, you're not trying to win a Pulitzer Prize. You're trying to produce a large volume of medium quality content. Whereas when I'm writing notes for myself, I'm trying to produce a small amount of stuff that I'm going to find useful. So I guess the use case is probably slightly different.

Nathan Labenz: (26:05) Yeah. Okay, that's really interesting. And then the what you didn't speak to as much there, which I imagine must be a significant part of the business, is this scaling things that were previously unscalable. As we're looking through the Athena client base and looking for examples of people that have done great things with AI tools already, one that we see is the ability, almost all of our clients are recruiting in some way, shape or form. So what we've seen there is the ability to scale recruiting workflows that you would previously delegate to a person, but now you can systematize, probably honestly do better profile evaluations even than the human was able to deliver in many cases, but certainly at way more scale. The ability to bring some of these functions where people maybe used to use Affirm or whatever in house and do it for 1% or 2% of the cost is insane. So I guess the question there is, do you see a lot of that kind of activity? And then also really interested in how do people wire that up? Are people using Zapier in your experience, or are they stitching stuff together themselves out of Google Sheets? Where are the actual API calls coming from?

Raza Habib: (27:28) So the majority of our customers are integrating the APIs into some form of front end product. They have some UI that they're building where they're going to be making a call to HumanLoop to call the model, and as part of that, we're going to log the data that flows through as well so that they understand how well things are working. We do have some people who are doing more low code, no code automation. Typically, we've seen people use Bubble quite a lot for this actually, and then some use of Zapier as well. But the majority of our customers are not on that no code, low code end of the spectrum. They're closer to, I'm integrating this into a product, and I'm going to be using HumanLoop as the back end, the way to understand how well things are working, the way to build my datasets to fine tune and improve stuff, but the user experience and the product is being built by them.

Nathan Labenz: (28:16) Do you think that's a reflection of the general market of LLM usage, or is that just maybe more of a reflection that you're in the YC network and so you're wired into product building companies?

Raza Habib: (28:31) In some sense, it's impossible for me to know, right, because I've only seen the sample of the market that I've seen. Well, actually, no, maybe that's not true because we do get a huge amount of inbound. And we narrowly focus on builders and founders and engineers. We don't build for everyone. There definitely is a large volume of people looking to do no code, low code automation. And I think that HumanLoop probably has not been built for them. So some of them end up using it anyway because they love the playground, and they love that kind of experience. But we see less of that because it's not what we've optimized for.

Nathan Labenz: (29:09) Let's start with maybe evaluation. You've gone through this process of experimenting, you're in the playground. Okay, you've got something that's worked for your however many different examples you could think up on the spot. By the way, I find that also pretty effective as a teaching paradigm for intro to what the hell is going on here in the first place. Let me run this, and I've done things like I'm going to put Kobe Bryant, Santa Claus, and Joe Biden in the three, and then we'll see how just a simple prompt varies with those variables. And that definitely helps people grok what a language model is.

Raza Habib: (29:50) I think for companies adopting LLMs for the first time, or even academics coming to this from other parts of machine learning, spending time in an interactive environment gives you a much better intuition for the capabilities of the models than just looking at benchmarks or numbers on test sets. Obviously, those quantitative measures are valuable and important, but you gain something qualitative and different through interactive, almost play with the models that I think is hard to gain if you haven't just spent some time with them. And that's partly why I think these playground environments, these REPL style environments are very important.

Nathan Labenz: (30:27) Yeah, preach on that point. I think that is so, so important. I mean, good God, I see so much misunderstanding that could be remedied with just a little play.

Raza Habib: (30:37) Yeah, I mean, a silly example of this is Noam Chomsky wrote an op ed in the New York Times, basically outlining all the reasons why LLMs would fail and giving a bunch of things that he thought LLMs would never be able to do, which they can already do. All of the examples he gave, you can just shove into the playground and run it, and it works. Literally the concrete examples, not even versions of them, but specifically the ones he gave. And you just think, how hard would it have been to just try?

Nathan Labenz: (31:07) Yeah, I know. It's baffling. I find that so true. Okay, well, maybe leave that aside. So we're using HumanLoop, we're doing the playground, we're actually making progress, getting somewhere. And now you've got this challenge and implementation of evaluation, which is connected to feedback. So how do you think about that? For context for users, I find this particular stat insane. In the GPT-4 technical report, they report a 70 30 preference ratio for GPT-4 over 3.5, which to me, given the qualitative difference in capability and the tenth to the ninetieth percentile on the bar exam and all that stuff, that seems like a pretty low ratio. So that suggests to me that evaluation is hard and it's probably something that a lot of people are deluding themselves and seeing patterns that aren't there. I mean, this sounds just like a total mess right now.

Raza Habib: (32:07) Yeah, it's certainly tricky. It's especially tricky for the tasks that are more subjective in nature, where actually, maybe you can assess the quality, but in some sense, the correct answer is what your user says the correct answer is. If you are a writing assistant or something like that, then that's much more subjective. There are more concrete examples. If you're writing code, then obviously it needs to run. You're generating an SQL query. Maybe it's easier to have an objective metric of success. But even for question answering or summarization, a lot of the tasks that people are doing, pure objective evaluation is quite hard. And so within HumanLoop, the option is both for quantitative evaluations. You can define metrics, etcetera, but we also give you the tools needed to capture human feedback, both internally, but most importantly, your end users. And so the way that works is we have a feedback API, and so every time you log to HumanLoop or you use our generate call, we return you a unique ID for that session, and then you can capture different types of user feedback from people interacting with your application to get a sense of how well things are working. And typically, we see people get success with three types of feedback. Explicit votes, things like you might see in ChatGPT, thumbs up, thumbs down. Those are useful, but you get a small proportion. The vast majority of people don't touch those buttons, and you're getting a more extreme skew. Implicit signals of feedback, so people look at the actions people take within their applications. If I generated a sales email, did they send it? Did they copy the marketing copy and use it somewhere else? Did they hit the regenerate button? If the person's sitting there generating again and again, it's probably a sign that things didn't work the first time. So those signals get logged as well as senses of how well things are working. And the final one is textual corrections. So if you're generating text that the person can edit and they edit it before using it, then capturing that can be a really useful signal for figuring out what went wrong or how you can improve it later, whether that's inspecting manually or just fine tuning a model on corrected results. People can define their own feedback types, but those three categories of votes, actions, and corrections, the ones we see people getting the most success with in practice. And then we give you an aggregated view of how is that varying over time, and that allows you to get a sense when you make changes. We saw this for a lot of our customers when they made the switch from GPT-3, Text DaVinci 2 to 4 or 3.5 when it first came out. They could just see their user satisfaction charts just jump up almost overnight. And I think the vast majority of people who didn't have tooling like this didn't really know. We changed the model. Did it get better? Did it get worse? Seems better. But how do you know if it's actually working better for your customers? Having that feedback both gives you this high level view of how well things are working, but then allows people to take more granular interventions. So something else that we see people doing is they will filter for the failure cases and then manually inspect some handful of those to understand, okay, what went wrong? Was it the data lookup that I did? I grabbed the wrong context information. Is the prompt wrong in some way? Can I tweak that? Is the model just not capable at this task? And they will do this loop where they'll filter for examples that didn't work that well, reopen them in an interactive environment like the playground, form some hypothesis for what went wrong, take an intervention, and redeploy. And because they have all the monitoring and the metrics in place, they're able to see what the impact of that was. Or HumanLoop also allows you to run a direct comparison experiment. So for some subset of users, you're running an AB test or multivariate test, we are seeing, okay, did this change result in increased performance or not? And so we see people run that loop quite often even before they're fine tuning models. They do it when they fine tune as well, and we can maybe chat about that. But this process of understand how well things are working, find some of the edge cases, find the things that are going wrong, fix them, repeat, is a very common workflow we see.

Nathan Labenz: (36:07) Yeah, and the iteration time on that can be down to minutes in theory, right, in some cases, because you're literally just giving a slightly incremental instruction or whatever. I have a ton of different follow-up questions that are coming to mind that I want to ask. On the nature of feedback, would you include something like generating multiple outputs and then asking the user which they prefer as an implicit? Or is that just something that you don't see that much? Because I know Anthropic does that in their loop, and it seems easy to be like, I like this one more than that one.

Raza Habib: (36:45) So we see that when people are doing internal evaluation. That's very common. In fact, I don't think Anthropic does this binary selection. OpenAI does ranking of the generated outputs. We have other customers who are building custom models, and they'll do preference as well. But that's a sucky user experience. And so when people are collecting in production data, they tend not to want to generate multiple options and get the user to pick one. Some companies have done this or experimented with it. I know that AI Dungeon was doing this for a little while, where when you generate it, they would generate a few options and ask you to pick.

Nathan Labenz: (37:19) Choose your own adventure in its purest form.

Raza Habib: (37:22) But in a choose your own adventure context, I think it's okay. But for most applications, it's not really what the user wants. And so people are more reticent to do that kind of preference gathering in production. But for internal evaluations, we see it a lot.

Nathan Labenz: (37:37) That's fascinating. To me it seems like an okay experience, but this is something that we're considering at Waymark where we're making video content for users. We have this cool experience right now where you basically find your business online, give a very short, Dolly-like prompt on what you want to see a video about, and then we return a fully formed composition for you. But I've been thinking, what's better than one fully formed composition? Maybe two, or even potentially more than that. If you watch Mad Men, they have multiple pitches come through. So if there's some way in which it can echo what it feels like to be a big company. What do you think is bad about that?

Raza Habib: (38:27) I think it's very context dependent. In that case, it's maybe not so bad, and I think it'll be fine. So two things come to mind. One, it's context dependent. If you're doing something like code generation or text completion in GitHub Copilot, I don't necessarily want to choose between a bunch of different pieces of code. I want a completion that's quite good. Maybe I can tab between a few, but generally speaking, I want it to work first time. But the other thing is just the goal that the developer has in mind. So I think that with the preference data, they're planning to fine tune the models with RLHF on this preference data. And so then I think it makes sense to have it in that format. Whereas a lot of what our customers are doing is they're trying to do monitoring or evaluation. They want to know, for the parameters that I have at the moment and the setup I have, is this working well? Is it causing problems? Are my customers getting success? When it's going wrong, why? And there, I think a single evaluation is fine because you're evaluating the same model. So it's a little bit of what you're trying to do and a little bit of the context. I think in some UXs, it'll be fine. In some, it won't.

Nathan Labenz: (39:30) Yeah. I also had a similar thought on this. I wonder if you maybe just have a take on this. Why do you think people don't make a more explicit trade between feedback and access? It seems like that is almost the AI successor to the ad driven model. At least for a while, the free version is based on you have to help improve the product. But I don't see much of that. Do you have a sense for why that wouldn't work or why people don't make that trade with the public more often?

Raza Habib: (40:08) The honest answer is no, I haven't thought about it that much. I don't have a strong view there. My suspicion is that people are quite happy to give this feedback anyway, and a lot of it is implicit. And so maybe you don't need to make the trade because you're getting a lot of that anyway.

Nathan Labenz: (40:29) From what I've heard, it seems like the rates are usually fairly low. As you had said, thumbs up, thumbs down, people don't hit them too much.

Raza Habib: (40:34) Yeah, the rates for explicit sources of feedback are definitely quite low.

Nathan Labenz: (40:37) So if you're clever enough to structure it in a smart way, then you can work around this problem certainly. But yeah, I don't know. I feel like there's some sort of inconsistency here where the received wisdom, which seems to check out to me, is the best RLHF cycle wins in probably a lot of domains, and yet people are not pushing as hard as they could to build that data engine and really get it to turn over as fast.

Raza Habib: (41:08) I think a lot of this probably comes down to stage as well. So I saw in the notes one of the questions you were going to ask me about is fine tuning and whether a lot of it's happening. So are people fine tuning a lot? And the answer is, in general, not that many. But the people who are fine tuning tend to be the ones who are further along or slightly more advanced in their journey around building LLM products. And I think a lot of this has to do with what is the low hanging fruit to improve things. Early on, you can probably get quite a lot of juice out of prompt engineering, which has a very fast feedback loop. If you're spending all of your time making those kinds of changes, then maybe this feedback data isn't yet that valuable to you. When you get to the point where you're now thinking about actually fine tuning custom models and going a little bit further ahead, then I think it starts to make a big difference, and I think the majority of people are still in that first camp. I think the reality is it'll stay a bit of both going forwards, but I suspect it's a maturity question. So I think about companies, one of our there's a YC company called Find. Perplexity is another example, but I know the Find guys quite well, and they're building LLM based search for developers. So think the best version of Google married with Stack Overflow. You put a query in, and it actually generates you answers with code snippets. They make heavy use of fine tuning and feedback, and they've been able to get substantial model improvements as a result of this. So they probably have the best in the world model now for this task because of that cycle they've been running, but they also have significant machine learning expertise. At the time that they were doing this, all of this stuff was really hard. Humanloop didn't exist yet. I don't think there were that many other tools around fine tuning. So I think for a lot of people, fine tuning is a little bit novel, a little bit scary. They're concerned about what happens when the next model comes out, but also they just have so much juice still to get out of prompt engineering that they haven't got there yet. So I think maybe what you're suggesting will come true in the future. I think my prediction is, and I think this is a fairly contrarian take, there will be a lot more fine tuning in the near future.

Nathan Labenz: (43:20) Yeah, that's really interesting. The other big thing that's just changing in this moment right now is you called this the stable diffusion moment for language models. And until you had that, if you just looked at what you could buy straight away with now GPT-4, even before that, 3.5 versus what you could fine tune given the available base models or OpenAI's fine tuning is still just the original DaVinci. It's the best thing that they're offering to the public. And that comes also at now, good god, a hundred times more expensive than Turbo. So that relative capability of the off the shelf versus what was available to fine tune seems like it's probably also part of what's held the fine tuning back. But that seems like it's flipping literally right now, because we're seeing stability and a bunch of other models that are pretty like the Llama class of model, even if not Llama exactly, but densely trained, pretty inference efficient, but strong open source RLHF model or libraries coming online.

Raza Habib: (44:43) Yeah. I mean, my assumption is we're at the very early days of this. One of the questions we get asked most is around privacy and private deployments and people being able to have their own models. And there's a big fraction of the world that'll happily use a third party API, but there's also a big fraction who really don't want their data leaving their servers and for whom a custom fine tune is the only option. And so there's definitely a strong demand for this, and increasingly, there are good open source models coming out. I think the first batch of open source models, in all honesty, just wasn't that good. So OPT and Bloom were unfortunately significantly behind the equivalent closed models, but that gap is closing. Llama is not a permissible license, so you can't use it for commercial purposes, but it is a model that is out there that is performant. It's very competitive with the best closed models, and I imagine it's just the start. I think large language models are somewhat different to the image models. They're harder to train. They require a lot more scale. The models are bigger. I don't think it's going to be as easy as it was for stable diffusion where you can have a four gigabyte model and very quickly people had it running on phones and laptops. The smaller versions of large language models are not as good. They are harder to train. I think that it's not going to be as fast or... But I also don't think that for GPT-3 level models, we have to wait that long for there to be a lot of open source alternatives or a lot of competition in the marketplace. I think if you want the biggest, baddest, best LLM, you're probably still going to be going to OpenAI or Anthropic for a while, but you don't necessarily need that for a lot of use cases, especially if you fine tune. One of the main reasons we see people fine tuning is cost and performance. So they're looking for smaller models that can do equally well or better on the tasks that they care about.

Nathan Labenz: (46:47) So what role do you envision yourselves playing at Humanloop in that future, potentially coming soon wave of fine tuning activity? Do you run the fine tuning processes? I don't expect you're going to say you would host models, but I'm going to have all these kinds of problems. I'm going to have the full stack of problems if what I've got is a downloaded instance of Stability LM or Stable LM and a dream. So what parts of that do you feel like are natural for you to help with?

Raza Habib: (47:24) At least early on, I imagine that we will partner with people to help with this. So what we do a really good job of is we have all of that infrastructure in place that captures the data that you would need to make sensible decisions about fine tuning and improvement. We have that evaluation data, the feedback. So it's very natural, and we already have fine tuning integrations with the large language model providers that have these APIs. If you want to fine tune GPT-3 and do that well, Humanloop makes that a very painless process. And so I imagine partnering with others who have similar APIs and increasingly doing that initially because I think to do that well is probably its own entire company to start with. And maybe over time, we do more and more of that. But at least in the early days, in the same way that we don't really want to own the model right now, I think that's a big and separate problem. I don't think we probably want to own the fine tuning process initially, but that might change over time.

Nathan Labenz: (48:19) Tell me a little bit about where you think RLHF is today in terms of who should use it, at what scale does it start to make sense? I think there's a lot of expectation that everything is going to be smooth with RLHF. I think you have an interesting maybe not so fast take on the difficulties of implementation there.

Raza Habib: (48:46) The non-PC version of this is RLHF is like sex in high school. Everyone's talking about it, but almost no one's actually doing it. And we get asked about it a lot. And I think it is true that RLHF leads to much more performant models. The gap between the RLHF GPT-3 models, if you look at the reports or the Anthropic ones and the ones that are not, is large. So there is a big performance gain to be had through RLHF. Some of that is just making the models easier to use. So it's not necessarily even about increasing the capabilities of the base model, but it's about making them more aligned with what the user wants out of them. That said, for a lot of the tasks that people come to us in practice where they're looking to do some specific thing and they don't need the full generality of the model and they have a dataset, supervised fine tuning is more than sufficient for them to get good performance, and it's a lot easier. And so in general, I'm pro RLHF as a concept and where it makes sense to do it if you have a big enough problem. But my advice is always to try to find the simplest solution to what you're trying to do first. And only if that doesn't work, go for more complex or harder things. And so if people are thinking about basically, in order of complexity, I think you have prompt engineering, which is very straightforward and very accessible and very fast, has some limitations to how far you can take it. You're never going to get a ten times latency improvement through prompt engineering. Supervised fine tuning is a little bit harder. It's more involved, but you can get gains that you couldn't get through prompt engineering because you can get big cost or latency improvements that are just never going to come through prompt engineering alone. And RLHF can give you significant performance improvements on top. Pick the appropriate tool for the job. How complex do you actually need this to be?

Nathan Labenz: (50:36) What is it that makes RLHF so much more challenging in your experience?

Raza Habib: (50:44) It's a multistage process. You're first training this reward model. You have to get all of this annotated data. You've got to make sure you do that process correctly. You're then training a reward model on that, so you have another model to train. And then after that, you're doing an RL step. So there's just more places for things to potentially go wrong. There's more complexity to handle. If you look at the appendices of the InstructGPT paper, there's a lot of nuances and subtleties that you have to get right to make this work robustly, whereas supervised fine tuning is pretty straightforward relatively speaking. You just need a dataset, not even necessarily that large a dataset for some of these large models. I was speaking to a founder last week who's been auto-generating tests. He hand-wrote 50 examples and fine-tuned DaVinci 2 on that, and now he has a pretty good model. And 50 examples is not that many for him to be able to get a pretty reliable fine-tune. With more examples, he could probably do it with a smaller model. To do the equivalent with RLHF would have been really hard for him and probably just not the appropriate tool.

Nathan Labenz: (51:45) How does that actually cash out in terms of failure modes? Is it that people can't make the process work because it's too intricate and there's just too many parameters to wrangle? I mean, I've heard that kind of account in the past, but then you also see these mode collapse type reports. And there's this sense of, you kind of have a lot of dark matter in terms of other domains of possibly much worse model performance as a result of the RLHF. What do you see there in terms of how it actually goes wrong for people?

Raza Habib: (52:25) At least from our perspective, it's more the former than the latter. It's just very hard to actually get it to work reliably. Do you even get the model to learn what you want to do at all or to do it robustly? Small changes in the reward model can have quite big impacts. Reinforcement learning in general is just a lot more finicky than supervised learning. RL is harder, and that was my experience even as a researcher. Every time we got rid of an RL component, everything seemed to just be a little bit more robust or a little bit more reliable. So it's more of that. In terms of things like mode collapse, the RLHF models, I think, are in some sense less capable than the base model conceptually or in some ways, but they're much easier to get to work. A lot of what you're doing is figuring out how to get the capabilities of this model to be easy to access. People like Riley, who I think you had on the podcast recently, are wizards that, taking the base model and having spent a long time playing with them, can figure out the right way to prompt them to get the output they want. The nice thing about the RLHF models is you don't have to do that as much. I think you mentioned this earlier. You can more reasonably expect an instruction in natural language to get you the outcome you care about. You are sometimes paying a little capability cost. Certainly the people who tell us they use the models for more creative tasks, like fiction writing assistance or things like that, they use the base models where they can. They prefer them to the RLHF models because they get a greater variety of output.

Nathan Labenz: (53:54) My working theory on this agent moment, which you said at the top is obviously all the rage right now and yet mostly they don't work. My sense is that the RL paradigm is a pretty good fit there and that there's just going to be a ton of what didn't work and then very concretely what did work in terms of Codex-style API calls generated or what have you. So I guess two-part question there. Do you think that's right? Do you think that paradigm will lock these little code generator agent models into form over the not too distant future? And then how does Humanloop think about playing in that space? You have the tools offering, but it's been a minute since we talked about that.

Raza Habib: (54:47) So it's maybe worth just mentioning what tools are in Humanloop. One of the problems that a lot of the companies that we work with face is figuring out how to get private company information into their models. And so tools in Humanloop are basically APIs that take text as input and text as output, and they're used to augment the models with extra information. So, for example, we have a tool that accesses the Google API or the SERP API. So if you do a factual query, it can look up Google, or you might connect Wikipedia or something that can pull in information from there and include that in the context of the model to help you get a more factual response. Google and Wikipedia are public sources of information, but increasingly people are connecting private sources. So they'll connect a database or they'll connect an FAQ or something like that and give the model access to that at inference time. So when someone comes and asks a question, the model can pull information, or we pull information into the model's context and allow the model to use that. So tools are essentially a way to add extra information to the model, which is slightly different, I think, from some of the other ways that tools have been used up till now where people have the GPT-3 plugins, for example, allow the models to take actions. Humanloop doesn't let you do that yet today because we haven't found it yet to be reliable enough. So we're very excited about it in the future, but we see less of that up till this point. In terms of will RL just make the agents, fix the agent problem, my suspicion is no. I basically think that the issue with agents is that you start with a core module that has some reasonably high probability of error, I don't know, 85 or 90% accurate, and then you chain these things together. And so the longer the chain gets, like 0.85 or 0.9 to the power n, as n gets large, that thing tends very quickly to zero. And so your probability of it working decreases rapidly with the number of steps in your chain, and you're essentially running open loop control. You have a system that's getting no feedback as it goes, and so if it makes errors, the errors compound. So I think that probably the solution will actually be some form of feedback mechanism, not actually human feedback, but some way for the models to heal their agents or heal their chains. So if it goes wrong, there's some other mechanism, another model maybe, that is able to look at that and go, "No, that bit's wrong. Try again," or "Here's what you might have done." Because I think you need some way to course correct. Without course correction, I just don't see how agents become reliable.

Nathan Labenz: (57:20) Yeah. I mean, I think those kind of work together, though. When people talk about agents, a lot of times you dig into these things, it might be a single language model, but it is kind of powering some sort of multi-agent configuration or ensemble or something.

Raza Habib: (57:38) And I think you need that. I think you need that for it to have a chance of working to make it robust. Some people may be getting these working. We certainly see a lot of people chatting about it on Twitter and posting very cool demos. From the production side of seeing people actually put these things into production and speaking to people who are trying to do that, we just hear again and again and again that they try and they don't quite succeed yet.

Nathan Labenz: (57:59) But what do you think I'm missing about this? Because what I kind of imagine happening with this feedback loop is basically, what's the most automatable sort of feedback is whether the code executed successfully or not. And then on the far end is do you prefer this sonnet or that sonnet, which is probably the hardest. Interestingly, visual art gets very comparatively close because you can make that judgment often in a fraction of a second. But nothing works at the speed of the code worked or not. So it seems like there's this very natural, pretty substantial dataset that's going to just accumulate in the logs almost, maybe not super usably automatically, but with the help of Humanloop, that stuff shows up. There's only so many APIs. There's only so many ways to call the APIs that are right. Obviously, you do have the world is shifting and this is never a done problem because people change their APIs. Although I think it's going to become on the API providers to come up with a way to make sure the language models continue to work before you know it.

Raza Habib: (59:10) No, I don't disagree. As I said, I've been talking about agents and we've been talking about them in Humanloop for well over six months now. We are very excited about it conceptually. I assume that it'll be a key part of this in the future. I guess I'm just giving you the perspective, I think given how hyped they are at the moment, I'm just giving you the perspective we're hearing from our customers who are trying to build with them. And the most common perspective we hear is we've tried really hard. It works 80% of the time, which is not good enough for our production use case.

Nathan Labenz: (59:47) Yeah. That's definitely consistent, I'd say, with what I've seen as well. We've had two CEOs of agent platform product companies on the show. And notably, neither one is quite scaling just yet. One is not even really quite released and the other has kind of a demo, but isn't, is definitely not hitting that inflection point in usage just yet, I don't think. Yeah, it does feel like it's going to be another wave that's kind of on us before we know it. Do you think we'll get out of, if you had to guess, 2023, are these problems largely solved and we have kind of agents doing our online bidding?

Raza Habib: (1:00:31) I'm very optimistic about the rate of progress, and part of that comes from kind of having course corrected a bit. So, you know, I've been in the field of machine learning, and I did a PhD in it for now, I guess, six or seven years, and I've consistently been too pessimistic in how quickly I think things would get done. So I kept making predictions. I thought, "Oh, that will take this many years." And again and again, I've kind of been beaten down to the point that I've kind of learned that this progress seems to be happening a lot faster than most might expect. So that's not a super reasoned answer, I suppose. But my intuition is that, yes, these things will get solved very quickly.

Nathan Labenz: (1:01:10) Yeah, I've honestly kind of had the other experience where I've been an entrepreneur for pretty much my entire career, and I've always underestimated how long different changes will take. And I may soon be proven to have done that again in terms of how quickly AI implementation can happen. But AI, just raw capability progress, is the one thing that has found the other side of that for me. I've always been, "Oh, by this time, there's no way you won't have this awesome experience." And then people just kind of live with the status quo a lot longer than I anticipate. But this has been the one exception.

Raza Habib: (1:01:50) There's the point where we get the capabilities and then the point when that gets into products. Part of what made us go and build Humanloop is that gap felt too big to us. That actually we could see that the model capabilities were far exceeding what was actually being productized or built for a long period. I think that turns out to be because productizing these things is harder than just having a model API. I think there will be a gap between when these things get solved in research and when people figure out how do I make this useful and actually productize it.

Nathan Labenz: (1:02:22) This kind of anticipates one of our typical closing questions, but I've asked a ton of extremely smart and very plugged in people now what applications they use that they would recommend to the audience. And you can answer that one. You probably have a good answer. But honestly, surprisingly, most people haven't named that many things. They've largely been, "Well, I use ChatGPT." And then we certainly hear a lot of Copilot. And then we hear, "That's about it." There's a little bit more, certainly some people are into the art. Occasionally somebody would be, "There's a spreadsheet plugin that's killer for me or whatever." The names of applications that people name, it's honestly very few. Are these AI-first products just too far behind the incumbents to overcome them before the incumbents can layer on the AI? Is it just that the amazing UX and UIs of our future haven't really been discovered or invented yet? How do you see that playing out over a couple year timeframe?

Raza Habib: (1:03:28) I think it's very early. You're right that most people are not using that many AI products. If I think about my day to day usage, I use various forms of coding assistant quite frequently. I use the HumanLoop playground a lot. For me, it's mostly replaced ChatGPT usage, but it's probably similar to what people are using ChatGPT for. I have various forms of summarization assistant attached to all of my sales calls that are creating transcript notes for me that I use pretty frequently. I'm probably using that 4 times a day or something. In terms of volume of usage, I'm using new search engines. I use Phind. When Perplexity had BirdSQL, I was using that all the time, their Twitter search, because it was insanely better than the terrible Twitter search experience. Unfortunately, it's not available anymore. So I'm increasingly seeing them, but I also think that the current wave of applications only really started getting built 4 or 5 months ago. So to be looking around and saying, where are all of them, seems a bit premature to me. We haven't had this for that long. But there's a second question, which is, is this more a sustaining innovation that'll help larger companies, or is this more disruptive where startups end up winning? And I've thought about this a fair bit. And I think the answer is almost certainly both. I think in established categories where you have a big player that's winning, integrating these features very quickly happens very naturally. If you're one of the large contract review providers or you're HubSpot or Salesforce and you have a CRM or something like this, then adding automated extraction of notes and adding summarization and all these kinds of features, I don't think is that difficult and obviously enhances the product, and they have the distribution channels, and they're going to get more user feedback. They probably win there. But I also think that there will be entirely new categories created or new styles of product that weren't possible before. The people who ask, what does the IDE look like if we build it from the ground up today? Or someone who's building an educational assistant. What does the next version of a language learning app look like? I'm sure all of the big successes right now are rethinking their products. And maybe it'll work as an add on, but maybe something new built from the ground up will replace that. And then there's just the UX experiences that people haven't thought of yet because this stuff is so new. I think we're still in that stage of plays on the television. We've taken stuff from the old paradigm and slotted it in. I don't think we've fully thought about what does this let us do that we really just couldn't do before because it's so early.

Nathan Labenz: (1:06:12) Yeah, that's a good analogy. I'm a collector of AI analogies. I'm not a connoisseur of too many things in life, but one that I might claim connoisseurship of is AI analogies. And I like that one. I haven't heard it before. But what I like about it is the big difference between the play on the TV and the modern TV show is just a ton of cuts, all these different things integrated together with a whole tool chain into a final product. And that is really where we're still very much figuring it out. So I think that's a very good image. I'm always very suspicious of what is sneaking into this analogy that's actually going to mislead me. So I'll have to report back if I come up with any concerns, but I do like that image a lot.

Raza Habib: (1:07:03) What I would say is that I think the incumbents that don't adopt this technology will fall behind. So I do think for a lot of companies, it is an adopt or die type moment. If you are a legal tech company and you don't start adding these things, if you are a CRM company and you don't add these things, someone will, and they will give a much better product experience as a result. I just don't think it's that hard for them to add them, and the large enterprises seem to have been remarkably fast to adopt relative to previous technology waves. I mean, this whole thing has been led in some ways by Microsoft. Who has been faster to add LLM features than Microsoft? Nobody.

Nathan Labenz: (1:07:40) Replit, they would point out, is right up there as well.

Raza Habib: (1:07:44) Replit is definitely up there, but they have a smaller product suite to be adding it to. And you just expect Replit to do it, right? Replit adding these things is great, but I expect fast moving startups to do it.

Nathan Labenz: (1:07:58) Yeah. Your point is very well taken. I've got Replit on the brain today because they've got a big announcement that I'm excited to see.

Raza Habib: (1:08:05) Oh, fantastic.

Nathan Labenz: (1:08:06) What they're adding to an already exciting product. But you're totally right, that Microsoft could lead in this space is would previously have been unthinkable.

Raza Habib: (1:08:15) And it's certainly something we're seeing at HumanLoop as well. Increasingly larger companies are approaching us because they want to implement LLM features. They've started to try in house. They're seeing the same pain points that others had. How do I prototype? How do I handle prompt management? How do I evaluate? How do I make this better over time? How do I fine tune? And they're starting to look for solutions. But that's fairly recent, I would say, more over the last couple of months than previously.

Nathan Labenz: (1:08:42) Do you see consultants? What do you think is the role of, OpenAI has this partnership with Bain. Do you think that's going to work? There are all these big companies that presumably can do process automation at a minimum and maybe don't have that plugged in CTO that a HubSpot and some other more tech forward companies have the benefit of employing. So are Bain consultants coming to you and bringing Fortune 1,000 projects to HumanLoop?

Raza Habib: (1:09:15) I can neither confirm nor deny. I guess OpenAI doesn't want to do the sales part of this, right? I think they're sincere in their objective being to build AGI. And so I think they are encouraging an ecosystem to develop on the tooling side. They're working with partners on the sales side. I think so that they can maintain their focus on what they see as the thing that they do best, which is pushing the boundaries of AI. So I think insofar as they're working with people like Bain, Bain is going to be better at enterprise sales than OpenAI is, almost certainly. And I think they're choosing to partner rather than try to do everything, which to me seems like a very smart strategy.

Nathan Labenz: (1:09:55) Yeah. Especially when you have the thing the whole world is clamoring for. A channel partner can really add a ton of value.

Raza Habib: (1:10:06) What we can offer from our perspective at HumanLoop is I suspect we have seen more people try, succeed and fail at getting applications into production than almost anyone other than maybe OpenAI. That gives us some insight, hopefully, into what applications are actually being built, and we discussed that a little bit, and also the challenges people have around reliability, factualness, evaluation, experimentation that I think almost everyone will face when they do come to actually try to productize this. And that's what HumanLoop is there for. We're building the tools that bridge that gap between I have access to the GPT-4 API, I have access to an LLM, and I actually need to make this robust and understand how it works in production. And I think it gives us a unique perspective. And some of it really is just having the right workflow to iterate very quickly. In fact, I actually, probably that's the thing that I would say is the most important. Because a lot of this requires trial and error, it's difficult to get it right first time. Having a really fast iteration cycle to be able to try something, understand how well that worked, go again, whether that's fine tuning, whether that's chaining the prompts, whether that's rethinking the UX a little bit, I think that really makes a big difference about whether or not you get to success. And the people who don't get there tend not to set up robust evaluation systems, so they don't know whether as they're making changes, things are actually getting better or worse. And if you're changing a lot of stuff flying in the dark, you're not actually going to make progress. And so I think really robust evaluation and fast iteration cycles have been the things that, if I was to have to extract principles, I think make this stuff work well.

Nathan Labenz: (1:11:53) I'd love to hear just how you think about guiding people up the sort of curve of scale and sophistication of evaluation, because those things I think are very much ideally should be working in tandem for people, but maybe not always are.

Raza Habib: (1:12:08) Yeah. So the typical journey we see is people start in something like the playground with a handful of test cases. And the question they're really just trying to answer for themselves is, is this even feasible? Can I get the model to do this task? They don't really know yet, and so they spend some time iterating with that. Usually, they're convincing themselves yes or no on that question. Is this something that's within the capabilities of the model? Maybe experimenting with a bit of prompt engineering. Typically, at that point, they'll go and actually wire this up into some kind of product. They might have some kind of internal evaluations. We typically see people also will hook this up to something like a Streamlit app or just a very simple UI to collect a little bit more volume of internal evaluation. And there, they're looking at maybe hundreds to thousands of examples just trying to get some quantitative metrics on performance. Some of the startups skip that step entirely. So that step is more common amongst the larger companies. The startups typically, once they've got satisfaction that it works 80, 90% of the time, will typically just deploy it, and then they'll use the in production data as a way to understand how well things are working, and then iterate very fast. By the time you have a few hundred interactions per day, which is not that many because people are often touching the models in multiple places, you start to have enough signal to start actually driving decisions. You don't need masses and masses of data, but you do need some usage. You do need some people coming through the app. And most have a lot more than that pretty quickly.

Nathan Labenz: (1:13:45) I already did the kind of version of products you'd recommend if you want to throw any else out there.

Raza Habib: (1:13:51) Mem's a good example here, right? Rethinking what a note taking app looks like if you try to put LLMs everywhere, a self organizing system for notes where you just dump everything in and it tries to figure out where things belong. I don't think people think of that as an LLM product, but it's obviously very AI driven in the background. I think that's a cool one. I'm a big fan of the new LLM search engines. I think Phind is really cool. I use Cursor all the time, which is that IDE product I was telling you about, so I'm a big fan of that. They've got an integration to VS Code. The ones we all already know about, like GitHub Copilot, everyone in our team uses that pretty frequently. As I say, I do end up using the HumanLoop Playground a lot. I now prefer it to the OpenAI versions or ChatGPT, and so that's where I live. And also, I think it's important for us to use the products ourselves to improve them. So that's another one I'm using pretty frequently. I have a notetaker that goes to all my Zoom meetings. I get transcripts and summaries from that, so I use Fathom for that. But I think there are many others, Firefly and others. I don't know if they also have those AI summaries built in. What else do we use pretty frequently? I mean, we also use just the raw GPT-3.5 and Claude models in our Slack quite a lot. We have a Slack channel and also individual access to Slack with those models built in, just having them there where you're working most of the time means we end up using them more than I think if we had to go to the playground or go to ChatGPT.

Nathan Labenz: (1:15:24) Okay, quick hypothetical situation. Let's imagine that in a not too distant future, 1,000,000 people already have the Neuralink implant. If you get it, just like everybody else, you get now the advantage of thought to device direct communication. So you can record your thoughts as text or use a UI. Would that be enough for you to consider getting an implant yourself?

Raza Habib: (1:15:53) Has it been safe for those first million people?

Nathan Labenz: (1:15:55) Yeah, let's say we're in COVID vaccine safety where you've certainly got some noise around it, but the general data suggests that it's overwhelmingly safe.

Raza Habib: (1:16:07) It's a difficult one to answer because I feel like whether or not I say yes depends so much on the political context around the technology, and I feel similarly with AI. We're building this very powerful, potentially hugely positively transformational technology. But in order for it to be positive, we need to make sure that everyone gets a say in how it's used and it's democratically controlled. And I think I would feel similarly about something like Neuralink. If the right safeguards were in place, then I would seriously consider it. I already have a prosthesis. It's my phone, and I'm glued to it all the time. So it's only one step further. But I'd want to be confident that I'm not opening up literally my brain to some model-driven concentrated... do I want Facebook or Google or whatever large tech company to have direct access to my brain? Probably not. But if all the right safeguards were in place and we had the right political structures in place, I'd be very excited about the technology.

Nathan Labenz: (1:17:10) Brilliant answer. I think the distinction there between medical safety and social, contextual safety is a very sharp one. That's also a perfect transition to my typical final question, which is just zooming out as far as you can. We've spent all this time really on the current margin of implementation and the struggles and the triumphs and the tools around that. But zooming way out, what are your biggest hopes for and fears for what AI is going to mean to society over the next handful of years?

Raza Habib: (1:17:45) So on the hope side, I really hope that it augments people to be able to achieve stuff that they couldn't do before. So I really hope that we accelerate the progress of science. The volume of literature being produced is way beyond what anybody can read in full. There's probably lots of connections to be made. If we can make progress faster in medical research, in other parts of scientific research, we've got diffusion more quickly, whatever it might be, I think that would be a hugely positive and exciting win. And we've seen early signs of this from DeepMind AlphaFold and things like that where it seems plausible that we can accelerate scientific progress with AI. I'd also be really excited about increasing access to education. So whether this be even just in the rich world, giving more people access to more personalized educational experiences, which is I suspect what will happen first, but also if we can reduce the cost of education far enough and figure out ways to give more people access to it. That's a really exciting vision to me. Personal tutoring is one of the educational interventions that seems to have the largest evidence behind it, but it's very expensive to scale with humans. What does an AI version of that look like? And that could be very exciting. I think freeing people from work they don't want to do is also something I'd be very excited about, and I think a lot of us spend time doing just drudge work as part of our day to day. I'm less excited about the potential for misuse. I think it could concentrate political power. I do think there are challenges. You mentioned earlier using AIs for screening CVs, and it always raises a red flag in my mind when you give autonomous systems these decision-making capabilities that have big effects on people's lives. Can we make sure that we don't bake in political or social biases and then scale them and systematize them worse than they even are now? So I think there are risks, but I also think there's potential huge upsides. I'm very excited about a world in which just software is generally smarter and works a bit better and it's easier to produce. One thing I'm just excited about is lowering how hard it is to build software products. I think there's lots of places where we could have good software, but the markets are small or it's not interesting for a company to be built around it, but it could improve some people's lives. And the cost of producing software is going down dramatically. So yeah, many big benefits: education, health care, science improvement, definitely risks as well, even before we get to anything that resembles AGI. And so excited, but cautious.

Nathan Labenz: (1:20:20) Raza Habib, thank you for being part of the Cognitive Revolution.

Raza Habib: (1:20:24) Thank you for having me.

 Published in:
 Episode

 Author

 Nathan Labenz

 View articles

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
