# Zooming Out on AI, from the Nick Halaris Show
# URL: https://www.cognitiverevolution.ai/zooming-out-on-ai-from-the-nick-halaris-show/
# Date: 2024-07-27
# source: The Cognitive Revolution

Transcript

This is a crossover episode where Nathan Labenz appears as a guest on The Nick Halaris Show.

AI Nathan: (0:00) Hello and welcome to the Cognitive Revolution where we interview visionary researchers, entrepreneurs, and builders working on the frontier of artificial intelligence. Each week we'll explore their revolutionary ideas and together we'll build a picture of how AI technology will transform work, life, and society in the coming years. I'm Nathan Labenz, joined by my cohost, Erik Torenberg. Hello, and welcome back to the Cognitive Revolution. This is AI Nathan powered by ElevenLabs, filling in for the real Nathan who is still in beautiful Brazil to speak about AI automation at the ADAPTA summit. We'll have more on that here on the feed soon, but for today, we're excited to share an episode of the Nick Halaris Show, where I am the guest. Nick and I, both alumni of Chippewa Valley High School in Michigan, connected through our former teachers, Mrs. Voss and Miss Cohut, who were big influences on each of us. This episode offers a big picture view of the AI landscape, balancing my sincere enthusiasm for the practical value of AI with honest analysis of just how uncertain the path forward really is. We start with my journey into AI, from longstanding philosophical interests to founding Waymark and ultimately to this podcast. Key topics include: AI's transformative potential in high value sectors including medicine, law, and self driving. The promise of abundance and liberation from mundane tasks, like AI automating food packaging. Concerns about AI safety and control, including the challenges of aligning AI goals with human values. Geopolitical implications, especially US-China dynamics in AI development and chip production. The potential need for a new social contract. Paths for responsible AI development, such as focusing on making current AI more useful rather than just more powerful. Overall, I advocate for swift adoption of beneficial AI while urging caution when pushing towards superintelligence. There's no consensus on many critical questions in AI, and this conversation reflects that reality. As always, but even more so for this episode, I want to invite your feedback. I take the responsibility of communicating the state of AI to people who may not have been paying close attention very seriously, and I want to be as accurate as possible. If you think I'm getting anything wrong or missing anything important, please reach out and let me know. If on the other hand you do find this an accurate and useful overview, we'd of course appreciate it if you'd take a moment to share it with friends. Now I hope you enjoy this conversation about the rapidly changing AI landscape with Nick Halaris.

From the Nick Halaris Show

Nick Halaris: (2:37) Hi, everyone, and welcome back to the Nick Halaris Show. Our guest this week is Nathan Labenz. Nathan is the founder of Waymark and the host of the popular Cognitive Revolution podcast and the world's most prominent AI scout. Nathan, welcome to the show.

Nathan Labenz: (2:53) Thank you. Excited to be here. Looking forward to this.

Nick Halaris: (2:55) Before we get into it, we gotta talk about our connection because you are the first person on the podcast that actually went to the same high school as me. And we owe thanks to Mrs. Voss and Mrs. Cohut, two of the best teachers at Chippewa Valley in Chippewa Valley history for kinda making this connection. But it's good to have a fellow Big Red on the program.

Nathan Labenz: (3:19) They still - we still use that nickname in 2024. I don't know if they retired that one or not. But, yeah, our AP history and AP English teachers respectively, definitely big influences on me, and I was excited to get an intro from them.

Nick Halaris: (3:34) Yeah. Likewise. I mean, they definitely stand out. As we talked, you know, when we first met, those two teachers stand out from the days at Chippewa Valley. They're excellent. They weren't the only excellent teachers, but they were two of the best. And I've kept in touch with both of them over the years, sounds like you have as well. So it's cool.

Nathan Labenz: (3:53) Yeah. Definitely.

Nick Halaris: (3:54) Did they retire the big red name?

Nathan Labenz: (3:56) There's been talk about it repeatedly. And I think the last time - it's been a couple years now - that was the last time I went out to a football game. I believe it was still unchanged. But one has to imagine it can't last forever.

Nick Halaris: (4:11) Yes. That entire school district, my middle school was Algonquin, and my elementary school was Erie. So, like, the entire district is based off of these neighborhoods.

Nathan Labenz: (4:22) And Wyandotte. So yeah. Yep. Those were a little - you know, I mean, we're way off the topic, but I feel like those are somehow more respectful in as much as they're, like, proper names. And the Big Reds is not how folks call themselves. So yeah, Big Reds is different.

Nick Halaris: (4:41) It's closer to the Washington Redskins, which obviously they opted to change their name as a result. Interesting. I hadn't thought about that when I brought up the Big Reds, but I'm glad you're here. There's a lot of questions, so many things I wanna ask you just because AI is like the number one topic in the news, and you have been all over it just in your business, in your podcast. And I thought a good place to start is, like, how did you get into or when did you get into AI? Interested in AI, and how did it become such a huge focus of your life?

Nathan Labenz: (5:13) Yeah. There's kind of two chapters to that. There's, like, the prehistory and then the recent history. The prehistory is that - and this is pretty common actually among people that are interested in AI and particularly those that are interested with a sort of eye toward how big of a deal is this gonna be and might it be the kind of thing that really could get out of control and be like a threat to civilization or humanity as a whole - is that I came across the writing of one Eliezer Yudkowsky online 2006, 2007 range was when I first encountered it. He is pretty famous at this point for being one of the earliest prophets of AI doom, if you will. He was writing about this before almost anyone else was thinking about it and saying, hey, we're on track here with the growth in computing power and the growth in these data sets. Like, at some point in the future, we're gonna figure out powerful AI. But the problem is we don't know how to control it, and we're gonna have a really hard time communicating our values to it. And the history of nature and even just the history of humanity is like a lot of extinction events. Could this be the next one for us? And he's unpacked that, of course, in, you know, literally, like millions of words of writing. So I read about that way back then. I thought, boy, this is really interesting. And I filed it for myself basically in the similar place as, like, asteroids hitting the earth from outer space. It was the sort of thing where I thought, this seems like it would be a really big deal if it were to happen. Obviously, an asteroid took out the dinosaurs. I wouldn't want the same to happen to us. And, yeah, it might be super unlikely, but it does seem like it's worth having somebody scanning the skies to try to identify any asteroids that might be headed our way. And if there were one, we'd wanna get the biggest jump on it that we could, and we'd presumably mobilize all of humanity to try to deflect that asteroid if one was really coming for us. And indeed, we do actually have programs like that where people are using telescopes and scanning the skies and trying to identify those advanced threats. So I kind of said, it seems like similar. I don't - doesn't seem very likely, but if it does happen, it seems like it could be a big deal. And so I essentially just supported people who were doing this sort of speculative work with small, you know, charitable donations and just also goodwill. Just the idea that this seems like the kind of thing that somebody should be taking seriously. I personally, though, didn't feel like I had the right skill set for the kind of work that people were doing at the time, which was very mathematical and very theoretical. And so I spent the last 15 years - from that was basically at the beginning, very beginning of my career until present - basically did entrepreneurship the entire time. And where those threads merged was in roughly 2020, 2021 with the rise of the generative AI moment. My company, Waymark, is in the video creation space for small business. And at the time, we described ourselves as a DIY video creation platform with the idea being small businesses need video content for all sorts of reasons, mostly marketing and advertising, but they have a hard time creating it. The video creation tools are super complicated. You need, like, years of experience to master Adobe suite of tools. We tried to make something easy, make it accessible in the browser, make it something anyone can do, yada yada yada. We did a pretty good job with that, if I do say so myself. But we hit a bit of a wall at some point where when we were talking to customers, we would say things to them, is there anything we could do to make this DIY video platform easier for you to use so you'd use it more? And a lot of times they would start to say, nah. I just don't really have that much to say. It is easy to use. You've made it pretty easy, but I just don't really have any more ideas for videos. Or I still - like, the hard part is actually coming up with what I wanna say in the first place, not so much using the tool. And so we realized, man, that's a pretty profound problem that there aren't really any good traditional software solutions for. And it just so happened that right at the same time, GPT - I was following from GPT-2, but with GPT-3, it was like, woah, this thing could really change the way we present our product to customers. Because if an AI can write a first draft for you, then that can be a totally different experience. Now you're not having to sit down in front of the blank page and say, what do I wanna say today? But AI can spit out a bunch of ideas. And I always remember this episode from the Simpsons where Mr. Burns goes to an art gallery opening and sees this art debuted. And he says, I'm no art critic, but I know what I hate. And I felt like that was the state of the early AIs, and our customers were in that Mr. Burns zone where they're not critics. They're not, you know, prolific in content creation. But if we could put some AI stuff in front of them, they could say, no, hate it, and just rifle through stuff until they got something that was good enough that they could latch onto and then actually work with and take forward from there. So I got religion around that real quick for our company. I just knew that to get over this barrier, we needed something qualitatively different. And, obviously, generative AI is qualitatively different. And so I poured myself into it and yanked the company in that direction, said we're gonna do basically nothing else until we figure out how to take advantage of this technology. And then I got really obsessed with understanding it, understanding how to make the best use of it. And it really did start with that kind of commercial motivation of just I wanna make the best product I can with this. But it's such weird technology that to do that, I felt like I needed to understand it better. And then as I got deeper into it, one of the big realizations was that it wasn't just the writing that was happening, but it was also computer vision was happening. And that was really relevant to us also because our users, our small business users, they typically have a bunch of photos of their business. And yet those sitting in a big folder is only so useful. Right? You have the same kind of problem. I don't really wanna look through there and pick the right photos. But if AI can understand the photos and make good selections for them, now we're in a totally different regime in terms of how easy the product is to use. So that was really interesting. That was advancing really quickly at the same time. And then also text to speech. We had a voice over service that we offered in the past staffed by professional voice over talent. Really good quality, but took days to turn around, cost a hundred dollars. If something wasn't right, there'd be another cycle. You know, I have to send feedback and the person would do it again, and that would, you know, also cost more money. So it was, like, good, but had some friction. Text to speech was also getting really good at the same time. And really a fundamental kind of realization, which is not unique to me, but was a big one for me to wrap my head around was the same core AI techniques were driving all of those improvements in parallel at the same time. Basically, the transformer, which people probably have heard of at this point, was being adapted to all these different use cases and was creating radically new and improved results across writing and computer vision and text to speech and a bunch of other stuff, by the way, as well. But those are the most relevant ones for me. And I was like, man, if this single AI architecture with basically the same core technique and strategy can do all these things, then it's only a matter of time before it's gonna be doing even more things and before they're all gonna be merged into a single thing. And if you have a single thing that can write and understand the world and speak and handle audio, and now as we've gone forward a few years in time, can generate music, can generate incredible visual art, can understand video as well, can have real time conversation with you. Now we're getting to something that is starting to look really powerful. And of course, that then called back to mind the Eliezer Yudkowsky writing from years ago. Like, how powerful is this gonna get? How quickly is it gonna get that powerful? And do we have effective means to control it and make it work for us? Or might we be inventing a rival to ourselves that potentially could get more powerful than us and potentially could get out of control? So that kind of brings us basically to the recent present. I was fortunate that I had a great teammate, longtime teammate who had been our COO and was the perfect person to take over as CEO. And so I was like, you know what? I actually wanna make that switch. I wanna get out of managing the company day to day and just go full time studying, trying to make sense of what's going on in AI. And if you're up for it, you can run the company. And that's actually been a great trade. He's done a phenomenal job. The company has grown. The generative AI moment has treated our company really well, and I'm still contributing there, but also just trying to make sense of the big picture. And, obviously, there's a lot going on.

Nick Halaris: (13:58) Absolutely. Yeah. I wanna get more into the big picture, but before we - I wanna close the loop on Waymark. So what kind of improvement did you guys experience as a result of all this technology that you just mentioned? I don't know what the right metric is, but did the business grow significantly once you started implementing these tools? What happened?

Nathan Labenz: (14:15) Yeah. Business growth wise, it's been really good for us. We basically doubled the business in 2023 while breaking even. We have raised venture capital in the past, but not recently. And so to double a business without burning money is definitely a very good trajectory and definitely much better than the trajectory we were on before. So the results in terms of just pure financial bottom line stuff have been really good. And then qualitatively on the product, it's basically night and day. In the past, you would - we had a big template library. You would browse through the template library, preview them, find something you think, oh, that kinda looks good. I might wanna do that. And then you would be faced with the writing challenge. What do I wanna say? Then how do I map that onto this particular template? And then I gotta choose all my imagery to match up with that. And then once I'm done with all that, now I can request a voice over job, and then I'll get that back in maybe two days. And then I can listen to that. And then if that's all good, then I can download it, and I can actually go use it. That - and that writing and image selection part, like, as much as we made it really easy, people would still often find it would take an hour. And an hour was really good to create a high quality video as of a couple years ago because the - what would the alternative be? Hire an agency or the other options were more time consuming, but an hour is still a lot. Today, if you go to waymark.com/ai, you can provide your business URL, which is like your homepage. We will go grab the information off of your homepage and kinda spider around your website to figure out what your business is all about, pull in all the imagery that you have there, and then we just give you a single text box. People have seen this kind of thing in other AI products. We basically say, what do you want? Do you have a new location opening? Do you have a sale coming up? Do you wanna describe a product? Do you just wanna introduce yourself? Whatever. You can type that in in 10, 15, 20 words, hit go, and it takes 30 seconds to get a fully formed 30 second commercial back. That's a full script. All the imagery is selected for you. The voice over is generated and added in, and it's all integrated. And then you can just sit back and watch it. So you're literally watching a fully formed production for your business in 30 seconds. You still have that Mr. Burns opportunity where you can be like, I don't like that. Just redo it, or I'll give you another set of instructions and you can try again. Or if you do like it, you'd also still do have all the detailed editing controls. And almost everybody makes at least some low level edit after they get the AI first draft. But it is a totally different and much more surprising and delightful experience. In the past, there was never that moment of reveal where you would get something that might be - it might not be awesome. It might be awesome. You could - but you could watch it and find out. You were the one creating. Now you get this moment where it's like, what's in the box? And you can open as many boxes as you want. And when you find something that you're intrigued by or excited by, then you carry on from there. So the - basically on every metric, from the speed to create, the feedback scores that we get, the number of videos that people do create, the sort of number of friends that they share it with that come and use it, and ultimately, the revenue has all just been tremendously improved by a thoughtful application of this technology.

Nick Halaris: (17:29) That's awesome. I'm happy to hear that the company is thriving, and I'm gonna have to check it out. I'm gonna throw a couple of my own websites through it and see what happens.

Nathan Labenz: (17:38) Definitely do. It's cool. It's a genuinely good experience. I can say that with not just entrepreneurs' salesmanship, but, like, it is a good application of generative AI that brings multiple different modalities together into a single thing that actually most of the time - we still have our misses, but most of the time, it delivers really good results.

Ad break

Nick Halaris: (18:05) Let's switch gears now and talk about the elephant in the room question. I feel like you can't really bring up the subject of AI without kind of talking about what got you interested back in '06, which is like, what are the implications? But rather than talk about what could go wrong, I wanted to ask you the other side of that question first, which is what could go right? If you put away the pessimistic view of AI and just think about what are the positive potentials, what comes to mind for you after researching in this for four years like you have doing this massive deep dive?

Nathan Labenz: (18:41) Yeah. I could go on about this for a long time, honestly. I think that the upside is really incredible. I mean, in some ways, hard to imagine, and you almost have to take it, like, sector by sector because there really is application to everything. But the Waymark experienced before and after is a decent guide, I would say, to everything in life. So I often talk about medicine. Obviously, in today's world, the US health care system has incredible technology and incredible doctors that can do amazing things, but the day to day experience of it is pretty crappy. It's, like, extremely complicated. You gotta make the appointment. You gotta go. You gotta wait. I went to urgent care with my kids this weekend. We were there for four hours. And it's - so it's not awesome. And access not as broadly distributed and cost is a huge factor. So, obviously, I can go on about the problems. But the upside is AI doctor. And already today, we have AI systems that are outperforming human doctors as evaluated by human doctors on a number of really important kind of down the fairway medical tasks. That includes differential diagnosis via chat. So for example, you're to envision that you - the way they set up these experiments and evaluate, you are a user. You chat into either a human doctor on the other end or an AI doctor on the other end. They don't tell you which one you're engaged with, but you just have your conversation. And then it's up to the doctors, AI or human, to figure out what your condition is. And then they have human doctors evaluate and compare who's doing better. And again, this is blind evaluation. The AI doctors are outperforming human doctors on these core tasks by a not insignificant margin already. That doesn't mean they can do everything that a human doctor can do. AI still struggle with the sort of long trajectory of your life at this point. That's a problem people are definitely working on and making good progress on. But at least in these sort of narrow episodic bounded tasks, the AIs are already outperforming your average human doctor, and they're doing it with a cost of less than one percent. You know, if it cost you a hundred dollars to go to a doctor, it probably costs you ten cents to talk to the AI. So literally point one percent cost. Of course, they're always available. So it's a 24/7 situation. You can always come back to that conversation later. Right? If you drop off and get interrupted or whatever or just have another thought later, you can always just return to it and ask again. So the sort of pickup where you left off was amazing. We're adding modalities to this stuff all the time. So when you hear modalities in AI, that's just like text is a modality, image is a modality, audio is a modality. So they're starting to get more integrated. Things like reading x-rays or reading scans are probably not as - I think it's a little just a little less clear how quite how they compare to the human radiologist or whatever that would be reading your information. But it's, like, getting competitive. I would say it's probably not quite better yet, but closing in. And then there's also just the research side. I just did an episode of my podcast not long ago on the models, and people probably have heard of, like, AlphaFold. Now we're on AlphaFold 3. And what AlphaFold, the family of models, allows you to do is understand the structure of proteins, which previously was really hard to figure out. And proteins - the all the little mini machines in our bodies, which are largely proteins and RNA molecules that have these sort of weird three-dimensional shapes and have these weird interactions, and all these interactions add up to life. But when something goes wrong, then people get sick. And there's been this incredible challenge for a long time to try to understand what is going wrong. A lot of times what's going wrong is, like, something is not shaped the right way, and so it doesn't fit with the other pieces that it's supposed to fit with. And so then there's some cascade of disruption that causes illness. But we couldn't even tell without huge amounts of work what is the shape of a protein until this AlphaFold series of models and other people - AlphaFold is the most famous one that comes out of Google DeepMind, but there's lots of other work in this area too. Now you can take a sequence, which we've been able to read the DNA really well for a long time. Now you can take a sequence of DNA and say, what shape of protein is this gonna be? And you get, like, pretty accurate predictions out. And this is gonna start to illuminate all sorts of how these things interact, what is causing what. All the complexity of these interactions is, like, still definitely something that is gonna take time to tackle, but it's a totally new class of tools that is going to dramatically accelerate discovery in biomedicine. So that's just in medicine. And then you could go, like, in law. Right? Like, people don't have great access to legal counsel. You're guaranteed a right to representation, but is that representation gonna be good? I would say already at this point that if you're guaranteed an attorney, you probably should also be guaranteed access to GPT-4. Because - and this is also my recommendation at present is, like, use both. I always say if I was genuinely in a health emergency, I would not put all my eggs in the AI basket. But I also wouldn't be without my AI doctor, and I would definitely be fact checking my human doctor against my AI and vice versa and, you know, trying to get the best of both worlds. Same thing for legal representation. I would be double checking. Anytime I have to sign a contract these days, I take it to a couple different AIs and say, I'm about to sign this contract. What are the most concerning things that you see in this contract that I should be thinking about? If I send it to three different AIs, and that typically would be like OpenAI's ChatGPT, Claude by Anthropic, and Gemini from Google, those are like your top three. If I give the same contract to all three and ask that same question and I don't get anything back that's really concerning, I'm like, okay. I'm good to sign. Tons of application in basically access to all the professional services. Driving was coming. The latest Tesla full self driving is getting really good. The prospect for robotics, I've got an episode coming with a company that is doing robotic food preparation. And apparently 70% of the cost, which I was very surprised to learn, but 70% of the labor cost, not including the food cost, but 70% of the labor cost when you're manufacturing food is plating the food. Preparing the ingredients and cooking is only 30%. 70% is, like, putting it into the packaging. And so this is what this company is focused on, taking the food and putting it into packaging. And it's a hard problem because all the - you know, he said, like, broccoli. Right? All the pieces are different sizes. You gotta get the right amount of weight. You don't wanna be underweight, but you don't wanna be too much overweight because that's waste. And they've created a robot that can do this work. So now they've got, I think, 20 million meals that they've had their robot actually plate and put into packaging. So I think the big picture is just like abundance, freedom from drudgery, very broad access to expertise. In economic terms, I often say, like, huge consumer surplus. Stuff that we pay a certain amount for today is gonna be available at under one percent the cost on demand via your phone or your device. Energy wise, this will also be - in terms of, like, climate change. There's a lot of focus that goes into, oh, these AIs are, like, very energy hungry. Personally, I think that's quite overblown because the offsetting factor is usually not considered. If I save one trip to the doctor, the amount of gas that I would have burned to make that trip covers a whole lot of chat with the AI. So I also do think we're probably gonna see significant improvement to climate type concerns. Google just put out a thing the other day where they create - it's like a shipping API. And you're like, man, shipping - it's a big business. Right? Everything moves on ships. But you would think, man, is that something - is that a Google project? It is. They said they can - with using their AI, you can double the profitability of your shipping business. You can deliver more packages or more tonnage, more containers with 15% fewer ships. And so it's - wow. That's incredible. And, obviously, a lot of energy gets saved when you do that sort of thing as well. So this is just like what's foreseeable now. There - I think it could get even crazier if the AIs start to do science. Where we're at right now is we have these generalist systems, like your ChatGPTs, that are pretty good at everything. They do make some weird mistakes. They do make some stuff up sometimes. So they have their, like, idiosyncratic weaknesses, and it is important to understand them. But they're, like, pretty good at everything, but they're not eureka good at really anything. And then we have these very narrow systems like your AlphaFold and your, like, Google shipping AIs that are superhuman, but in a very narrow domain. And those things haven't really been integrated yet where the generalist AI can use the superhuman or can design its own, like, superhuman narrow AI tool. If we start to see that loop get closed, then all bets are off. But that also, to some extent, at least foreshadows or calls to mind, like, the other side of the coin. Like, all bets are off possibly in a good way, but also if you have AIs that are, like, advancing science and answering previously unanswered questions and running highly autonomously and maybe doing things that we're struggling to keep up with or struggling to understand, then that may be amazing forever, but it also definitely creates some risk of broadly speaking things getting out of control. But I am very enthusiastic about the upside. I often describe myself as an adoption accelerationist and hyperscaling pauser, and that's, like, very in the weeds jargon. But, basically, I wanna see us take advantage of all this great stuff that AI has to offer. I want my self driving car. I want my AI doctor. At the same time, I do think we should increasingly start to exercise real caution in just how fast are we gonna continue to push the scale up and up to create more and more powerful systems. Because we don't have that much farther to go before they are genuinely gonna be more powerful than we are. We're not gonna change that fast. They are changing quite fast.

Ad break

Nick Halaris: (29:40) That vision sounds exciting because we live in a world where there's, like, mass inequality. And here in America, like, we're very rich compared to the rest of the world and it - I think Americans forget about that when they compare themselves. But the world that you're describing sounds like we could get to - we'd have this massive deflation, like all the inflationary pressure that is causing problems in our political system could be taken care of by this massive deflationary trend in every product that you could imagine. It sounds like even food. I was thinking there would be a limit to it, but then it's what you've mentioned about the labor cost. Like, labor is a huge part. And I guess the only question I have about the positive side is what happens to all these people who are doing those jobs?

Nathan Labenz: (30:31) Do you think we need a new social contract for the AI era? And, yeah, I think - I'm glad you asked that question because I think that is - among even among the people that are very bullish on AI, I think it's an underdeveloped, under theorized idea. The sort of standard answer is like, I'm very privileged to do work that I genuinely enjoy. And if I didn't need to earn any money - if nobody - even if nobody was willing to pay me anything, I would probably still spend a good amount of my time studying AI because I'm just genuinely fascinated by it. But that's not really the case for people who are scooping food into trays at a rate of 20 scoops per minute. It's a scoop every three seconds. Often, I've just learned this from this last episode. I'm not, like, an expert in this, but often that work is done in cold rooms, so it's 30-some degrees. It's not super pleasant. So I would venture that the vast majority of people doing that kind of work in today's world, if you said, hey, you can have your needs met and you don't have to do that anymore, would you take that trade? I think most people would do it. I'm not one who's too worried about, oh, their meaning is wrapped up in this. That might be true for me to a degree. If I was deprived of being able to study AI, I would feel some loss. I don't think people would be like, oh, man. I just long for the days when I was in that 35 degree room scooping food into trays at an every three second pace. I think people will honestly find better things to do with their time, but we do need a new contract. And right now, we don't have a great idea about that. Most of the answer that you get when you talk to the technologists is we're probably gonna need universal basic income. And okay. I think it's probably time to get to work on that. Sam Altman from OpenAI, to his credit, has been funding, and not a lot has been written about this, but he has been personally funding universal basic income experiments for years now. So he's definitely somebody who has kind of believed in the power of AI and how far it could potentially go has at least been trying to do things to get society ready for it. But that's, I think, definitely not nearly as much in that direction as we may soon need.

Nick Halaris: (32:58) Yeah. And it's almost like it - maybe it's a little early because what we learned during the COVID era is that this, like, deficit funded transfer payments, like all of the CARES Act money, they actually are inflationary. But if AI was producing this 99.99% deflation, you could probably do UBI and not have inflation. Right now, if you did UBI on scale, you'd have a major problem, even more than we saw during the COVID era. But there probably is a moment in time where you could, like, you could pull it off, but it might not be just yet.

Nathan Labenz: (33:33) Yeah. I would say it's going to be a tricky thing to navigate. I think we've got multiple tight ropes to walk in on a couple different dimensions, and this is probably one of them. We're definitely not at a point yet where everybody can quit their jobs. And I should caveat everything I say with, like, there's always the possibility that progress really stalls out. This is probably the biggest picture question in AI right now. We've seen 10 to 12 years now of the same basic paradigm just scaling up and giving us more and more at every level of increased investment. The inputs to AI are data, compute, and algorithms. You need data to learn from, you need compute to crunch the numbers, and you need algorithms to actually make it work. What has been scaled up is data and compute over the last 12 years with the algorithms constantly getting better as well and being more efficient in terms of converting data and compute into capabilities. So we're 12 years into that paradigm. It hasn't shown any sign of slowing down yet. There's some chance that there's some law of physics or some weirdness that isn't well understood that could pose a hard barrier. Most people, I think, that are really in AI do not really expect that. Although we don't have a scientific law that says that doesn't exist either, so we're definitely flying a bit blind. But if it does continue, then it won't be that many more generations before we're in, like, a very different regime. Because right now we're in the zone where, hey. I can ask ChatGPT to write me a little script of code. And oftentimes, it can do it right away. But it can't do, like, a huge project. It can't take over the job of a full software engineer because it can't plan on long enough time horizons. It's not really that it's not smart enough. Like, it is comparably smart, but it lacks the long time horizon planning. It lacks the sort of contextual awareness, and it definitely could stand to be smarter too. But those problems are seemingly on track to being solved unless some barrier that isn't very conceptually obvious were to emerge. Anyway, this is all just a caveat of there's some chance that we look back at me in this moment and say, boy, that guy was really high on his AI supply and it's leveled off. I personally don't think that's very likely. I could - if you were to say, like, percentage wise, I couldn't put it less than, like, 10%. I'm not that confident in all this will happen, but it does seem like more likely than not that it will happen. And if it does happen, it's probably gonna happen over the next few cycles because GPT-2 was, like, not really coherent, couldn't really do much of anything, but could, like, sometimes create language that was uncanny valley, passable. You might be tricked every once in a while into thinking that actually made sense. GPT-3 was, like, good enough to write video scripts for Waymark. GPT-4 can pass the bar exam. We've now got stuff that can pass medical licensing exams and outperform doctors on diagnosis. What's next? Right? There's not that much more room to go before we start to really enter a different regime. And - but, yeah, it's all coming at us extremely quickly. That's why I think of it as a tightrope because it's - five years from now, the world could be extremely different. We need to start to prepare for that and figure out how to navigate that transition. But at the same time, it is true that, like, we're not yet at the point where everybody can quit their jobs today. This is a tough one for society. In the past, these things have taken generations to unfold. The industrial revolution took, like, depending on exactly what you wanna count, multiple generations. The electrification of America took 60 years from the time that Edison invented the light bulb to the time that my, like, grandmother in rural Kentucky got electricity. And so people went through whole careers, and they could see that change was coming, and it was like, okay. Fine. But for me, for my career, I can finish out being a blacksmith, and then I'll retire and my kid will do something different maybe. And my kid can't follow in my shoes, and that in and of itself can be disruptive. But now we're in a regime potentially, at least, or I would say likely, where within careers, you're gonna have this disruption where it's - I was a - we are seeing this already. I was a copywriter. Copywriting is not the thing it was. I was a voice over artist. We've seen the - we still do offer the professional voice over service, but the volume of it has dropped tremendously. I'm a visual artist. Again, people are making a lot of visual art on their own, even music now. You go to Suno or Udio, and these things can make full songs. And they're getting into the level where it's, I actually like that on its own merits. They're starting to be genuinely competitive. So, yeah, in a sub decade time frame to see all this kind of stuff come on, how are we gonna adapt to it? What's the new social contract? It's - we're really gonna have to thread the needle to make that transition. I don't think we can - to think that we could make it smooth is probably honestly not in the cards. It's gonna be choppy. But to hopefully at least manage it well enough to come out the other end without, like, total upheaval, even that, I think, is gonna be quite hard.

Nick Halaris: (38:58) I think so too because it's potentially so transformative to what the economy needs. Right? If you don't need all this labor, it's a real problem for the entire system. I wouldn't actually - after the first time we talked several months ago, I was blown away because I had not really been paying attention to AI that much. I've obviously followed it, but I had never heard such an optimistic sort of story that you shared back then. And I was trying to think about what does the world look like if everything is free? Because that's - it's not gonna be free, but it's essentially compared to what it costs today, it's essentially going to be free if the AI - if the optimistic AI story comes together. And, to take it full circle, Mrs. Voss will be happy. The only thing I could think of is to look at history. And this is a bad analogy, but I think it's worth considering, which is maybe what human beings will be doing are what the non-slaves were doing in the slave based ancient societies, ancient Rome or ancient Greece, where the elites or the citizens of these city states, they didn't really have to do anything that we do. Like, modern people have to produce economic output to survive. They were relying on their slaves that they took from other countries and whatnot. And what they did was they engaged in art. They worked out. They fought a bunch of wars and engaged in politics. And maybe that's just what human beings are gonna do in a world where they don't have to spend 40 or 60 hours driving to and from work, doing work. I'm not sure. What do you think about that?

Nathan Labenz: (40:38) Yeah. I don't know. I'm optimistic about that in as much as - I mean, there's a lot of concern about, oh, meaning is attached to work and whatever. I'm optimistic we'll find good things to do. Making art for art's sake, I'm terrible at playing the piano, but I do enjoy it. And it's very much for its own sake. I'm definitely not good enough to perform in front of others or for anybody to care what I'm playing on the piano. But I do still find it in a purely experiential way enjoyable. I'm learning. It sounds at least okay enough sometimes, and I enjoy the challenge of it. And I would like to do more of it if I had more time available. So I do think that most people have things like that. I think there's also really interesting questions about - the slaves in this analogy are the AIs, and are they going to start to matter in a moral sense? That's another question that is dramatically under theorized. We don't really have a great track record for how we treat the sort of producers of the, you know, the subservient producers of society, whether they're human slaves or animals or potentially in the future AIs. I think right now people are very sort of dismissive of the idea that the AIs could be conscious or could matter in some moral sense. And I tend to share that view. Like, I don't lie awake nights worrying about the experience of AIs because my best guess is they probably don't have any. But at the same time, we don't know where our own consciousness comes from. I remember as a kid being told that animals were not conscious or didn't feel pain. People have often said babies don't feel pain. I don't think any of that's true. I would at least want us to be mindful of - the AI part of that equation could be at some point in the future. And, yeah, there's also, like, the wars part of it isn't, like, super encouraging either. Hopefully, we will not be fighting wars with each other for lack of anything better to do. But I am optimistic about that. I think in a world where we have abundance and where medical breakthroughs are happening and we're, like, potentially living longer and healthier, I would hope that we would be able to avoid war for entertainment sake. Like, I think we're better than that. I'm not like an extreme optimist on human nature, but I think if all those good things come to pass, my best guess is we'll find at least decent ways to use the time. We might end up spending a lot of time in VR. I definitely think VR has not really taken off, obviously. I think the biggest problem, and I do have an Oculus headset, but I don't use it very much, mostly because there's not much great content in there. And I do think AI generated VR environments is like one way that VR could take off because it could just be like lots more to explore. So I wouldn't be shocked if we do end up in a significant - if headsets on is, like, the new head in the phone, that's one possibility. And it could be, like, quite fun. Right? People love their video games. People find these things, like, very immersive. I'm a rare person who aspires to play more video games than I do. I find most people either don't play any and are happy with it or play too much and feel like they should cut back. I, like, dabble occasionally and feel like, man, I wish I could get into this a little bit more. In the future, maybe there's VR worlds to explore as well. And obviously, there's space too. Right? There's the idea of colonizing space, and I don't think that's out of the question. There are definitely some major challenges in terms of getting our biology to survive in space in any sort of way that we would find pleasant. And it certainly might make sense that we end up sending robots out into space instead or in advance of us. But, yeah, there's lots of stuff still that I think we'll be able to turn our attention to, assuming we can get all the kind of preconditions and a new social contract worked out.

Nick Halaris: (44:37) Totally. Yeah. I think so too. I feel like the industrial revolution created a lie. Not definitely created a lie, which is that the purpose of life is to be economically productive. And so we organize our whole society around that. Right? Like, even the school system is essentially built around that. And I see it in all generations of people that I engage with, like, they are prioritizing things beyond economic life. I still think that's the dominant pursuit. Basically, everyone is trying to make it economically and we're trying to get rich. It depends on where they fall in this spectrum. But that's not necessarily true. That's the point of life. And these AI technologies may bring humanity back to a different way of living where you still have to produce because you have to survive and your society has to produce, but it isn't the thing that you get told that you're supposed to do, which is what kinda happened for many generations now in our world, which could be really interesting. It could actually be much better because industrial life is very difficult. Like, it produces a stratified society like we've been talking about. And like you mentioned several times, yeah, if you're lucky like us and you get to do what you wanna do, it's amazing. Get up every day, do the work that you wanna do, but, man, there's hundreds of millions and billions of people in this world who don't get that opportunity, and that's not fair, straight up. So I'm pulling for the AI optimist vision for sure.

Nathan Labenz: (46:15) Yeah. The fairness question is gonna be a really interesting one too. I think it will be a scrambling in a way of the current paradigm. I think this is true in many ways actually with AI where people wanna put, like, a binary question on it. Is it gonna be good for inequality or bad for inequality? Is it gonna be good for the environment or bad for the environment? People are looking for, like, an answer. And almost always, I find that it kind of defies those, like, easy choice answers. In the case of equality, I do think we will likely see dramatic equality of access and maybe even, like, dramatic move toward equality of consumption. But that may come with dramatic inequality of, like, power and control, and maybe wealth. Like, who owns the AIs? I don't necessarily think that will be very egalitarian. It might be that the state ends up owning them. It might be that a few mega companies end up owning them. There are visions out there of, like, highly decentralized AI. I don't think that's where the technology is currently trending just because it is so - you need, like, massive physical capital to build the systems at the scale that they currently need to be built at to be as powerful as the things that we're used to using. But, like, it's a weird dynamic where OpenAI and Microsoft are working right now on a $100 billion data center, a single physical installation that they're planning to invest $100 billion in to run AI. And then at the same time, the best model in the world, which is GPT-4o, the latest one from OpenAI. It's not the best by a ton anymore because the other two companies, Google and Anthropic, are nipping at their heels. But it is consensus the best model in the world. It's free for all to use. You can go to ChatGPT and use the best AI in the world for free. I always think about that Andy Warhol quote where he talks about the great thing about America is that the president drinks Coke and Marilyn Monroe drinks Coke and you can drink Coke too, and there's no amount of money or power or status or influence that can get you a better Coke. And that's much more true in AI than you might have expected, because they can certainly charge a lot more for it than they do. They do have a mission that I believe is quite sincere to make it very broadly accessible and to really make it benefit all humanity. We haven't even gotten to the point - all these, like, risks and crazy scenarios that we've talked about haven't even gotten to the craziest stuff yet, which is like, what happens if we can't control the AI itself? But at least for now, there's this sort of weird skewing of the current situation where if we are currently worried that the worst forms of inequality are, like, people are poor, people have to work shitty jobs, people don't have enough to eat, or can't get to a doctor when they need to, or they have bad education. Those things really look like they could be solved. And the fact that GPT-4o is free for anyone to use is like a leading indicator of that. But then if that $100 billion data center is a sign of a trend too, then you might have a situation where those, like, super powerful systems, even if they are broadly accessible and their benefits are broadly felt, they may be owned and controlled by a very small few entities. And who knows exactly what those entities will ultimately be?

Nick Halaris: (49:32) Yeah. Definitely. Let's talk about that. We spent a lot of time talking about the optimistic case. But going back to the '06 moment that you had, from a theoretical standpoint, what exactly are people afraid of? I understand, like, Terminator. Look. That was my favorite movie as a kid. So I understand the idea that maybe there's a moment where AI systems turn against us. But how does that actually happen, or what is the real fear here?

Nathan Labenz: (49:58) I'll give you a meta comment first and then get a little more specific. I think these discussions are often - if you hear debates, and I'm not a big fan of debate, often these things are presented as a debate between the people that are worried about it and the people think we don't have anything to be worried about. And the way that I see discussions often break down is somebody will ask exactly that question, and it's not a bad question. But then somebody on the worried side, they'll say, here's one example of something that could happen. And then the person will be like, that seems pretty far fetched. And then the first person will be like, that was just one thing that I came up with to try to give you something concrete. It's not that I think exactly that's gonna happen. That's just one thing. So the way I think about it in the abstract is as a - to get a little faux mathy for a second - almost like the integral over a huge space of possibility. That there's tons of dimensions, tons of different factors to consider, tons of different combinations of ways that the world could be in the future. And I don't really think any of them seem to me to be super likely, but I do think there's enough of them out there and enough of them seem pretty weird that in aggregate, it seems like there's a pretty good chance of the future being really weird. So it's not that I'm, like, pinpointing anything, like, super specifically. It's just, man, there seems like a lot is in play, and a lot of that possibility space seems, like, weird and potentially not in a good way. Okay. With that said, now I'll do the thing where I try to get specific. I think one key worry with AI in terms of, like, how would you create this dynamic where it develops its own ideas or starts to optimize against you or where things could really go haywire in, like, a way that can be relayed in a narrative is often thought to stem from one of the ways that they're trained right now. One of the big training techniques is called reinforcement learning from human feedback. Basically, the AI does stuff, humans give it a score. It learns to maximize the score. And there's a couple different ways this can be set up. You can give it a one to seven score. Sometimes they'll give you two outputs side by side, and you pick which one you prefer. But it takes those points of feedback, and it learns from that feedback how to do things that it believes are more likely to elicit a high score from you. So true north for the AI in this training regime of reinforcement learning from human feedback is maximize the human feedback score. That is literally what it is being optimized to do. We also know from a field called mechanistic interpretability, which is the science, and it's a very young science, of looking inside the AIs to figure out what is going on inside of them. Why are they doing what they are doing? What are they thinking, so to speak? And when I air quote thinking, because it's not thinking in exactly the same way that we're thinking, but there are some notable similarities. People are starting to be able to tease apart the different concepts that AIs are representing internally and finding that there are, in fact, like, pretty human recognizable concepts. Things like harm or fairness or love or justice. These are concepts that the AIs actually are learning. And it's a really remarkable finding because people have often - many people, probably most people have heard that ChatGPT is just predicting the next token. It's just predicting the next word. It's only doing one word at a time. That is true. It is only outputting one word at a time. But in order to do that, it is starting to develop these high order semantically rich human recognizable kind of abstract concepts as a means to making the right prediction for the next token one at a time. People are starting to even be able to look inside and see what these things are. Okay. So the key point on this reinforcement learning from human feedback is we are not perfect evaluators. We are fallible. Right? We are not even a great judge all the time of what is good for us. We have our biases. We have our errors in thinking. What happens if the AI starts to learn the difference between what is true and what will get the highest score from the human? Those things might be often the same, but in some cases, they might be different. And if there's enough of a difference there that it becomes useful to learn a separate concept of the truth, the way the world actually is from what to tell the human to get the highest score, now you've opened up the potential for deception or some sort of telling you what you wanna hear. This is sometimes called, like, sycophancy as well. But, basically, the core idea there is if it is understanding the truth as a distinct thing from understanding what will please the human, now we've created an opportunity for things to potentially go haywire as they get more important. There are other kind of related concepts called instrumental convergence. That's another big concept in the AI safety discourse. Basically, what that means is if I give you a goal, whatever that goal is, there are certain things that are gonna make it easier for you and more likely for you to achieve that goal. One is if you get turned off, you can't achieve your goal. So you're probably not gonna wanna be turned off if your goal is to achieve your goal. So then people sort of think, well, jeez, no matter what goals we give the AIs, they're probably gonna learn that they shouldn't allow themselves to be turned off because that will prevent them from achieving their goal. Similarly, having more power and resources is always good to achieve your goals. So whatever goal you have, people think, jeez, the AIs are probably gonna realize that the more power and resources they have and the less likely they are to be turned off, then the more likely they're gonna be able to achieve that goal. And that's true for almost any goal. Right? So that's why it's called instrumental convergence. These things are means to an end for any ends that you might have. And that's why people are very worried about, like, power seeking AIs and AIs that are resistant to being turned off. And then you think, jeez, maybe - what do we do about that? There's a lot of research going on into that to try to figure out - maybe we can monitor their internal states. We've - I just said that we have these techniques for understanding that they're developing these higher order concepts. Maybe we can detect the higher order concepts and either zap them out of existence, or - there's other - people may have seen the Golden Gate Claude thing recently where Anthropic, the makers of Claude, released a Golden Gate Claude version. They isolated this concept of Golden Gate Bridge, which goes to show just how many concepts there are too. We're not talking about a few. We're talking about millions of concepts that they've learned to represent. And then what they did is just every time you used it, they just injected Golden Gate Bridge concept and just turned that dial up independent of all these other concepts. Right? There's love, justice, mercy, friendship, whatever. And then there's somewhere in there's Golden Gate Bridge, and they just turned the Golden Gate Bridge dial up. And now all the thing can talk about is the Golden Gate Bridge. So you can imagine saying - and that's a silly example, but you can imagine saying, how about a notion of harm or a notion of power seeking or a notion of resistance to being turned off? Maybe we can identify those, and maybe we could turn those down or monitor for when they're present or active. And have some trigger that kind of prevents the system from continuing in that way. There's a lot of, like, ideas at this point as to what we might do about this. And honestly, I think the science of interpretability is going really well. It's going better than expected. So the optimistic take would be we're on our way to figuring it out. The pessimistic take would be we're only getting on our way to figuring it out, and the systems are getting a lot more powerful, and we may not have enough time to do all that science and have really robust control systems in place by the time we get really powerful stuff. So those of us like me who are enthused about AI but also worried about it getting out of control advocate for, like, caution on making more and more powerful systems, heavy investment in this interpretability science. And with that science done, I think it's very plausible that we can safely continue to advance the capabilities. But I just - I'm like, man, we have theoretical reason to believe that they may start to understand the truth as a distinct thing from what to tell us. We know already that they have these, like, rich concepts. We know that - again, there's a very obvious reason to believe that they may become resistant to being turned off, or they may want to accumulate power and resources. This just seems like a very volatile situation, at least until such time as we have really good systems for control or techniques or strategies for control. And those are developing well, but still really nascent. And I would not like to see a race between those - like, right now, we're just scaling up, putting more data, more compute, basically as fast as we can. Like, OpenAI and Microsoft building a $100 billion data center, that represents, like, just - yeah. As much as they can do as fast as they can do it. And maybe we could just pull back a little bit there and maybe shift some of those resources into the figuring out how to control these things bucket. Once we fill that bucket up, then we could rebalance. That was what OpenAI was supposed to do with the super alignment team. I'm sure, again, these - I live so much in my own bubble. I don't really know what other people have heard about, but probably people have heard about the safety team largely having resigned from OpenAI recently. By the way, that's the second time in their history that happened. The Anthropic team was a previous mass resignation from OpenAI for basically the same reasons of not believing that they were sufficiently invested in creating safe AI. So they left to found Anthropic a few years ago. Now the next generation of safety people have essentially resigned en masse. And one of the reasons was OpenAI had made a commitment to put 20% of their compute resources into this project that they called super alignment. And then they basically didn't follow through. And the super alignment team was, like, counting on this compute capability or capacity to do their own safety focused research, and they just weren't getting it when it came down to it. So eventually, they said, look. We can't even do the work. We're not gonna sit here and pretend everything's well when it's not. So they basically resigned en masse, and now they're all on media tours. That's the kind of misbalance that I do genuinely worry about where on the one hand, they're building a $100 billion data center set to open in a couple years. On the other hand, they can't give 20% of what they have today to the safety agenda. That seems off to me. I would definitely like to see a more serious investment in the safety and - then if you listen to the current leadership of OpenAI, they'll basically say, hey. We are very serious about this. We had some difference of opinion with these folks, but don't worry. We're very serious about it. I don't know. I'd like to see a little more seriousness still yet. I don't doubt that, actually. I do think, you know, as I said about Sam Altman earlier, he's been invested in universal basic income. They have done a lot of safety work at OpenAI. It's not like they haven't done anything. So I can definitely say there's a lot to appreciate about what they have done. But as we get closer to this moment of potentially literally making systems that are more powerful than we are, I think we should do more. And it does concern me that the super alignment team wasn't able to get the resources, not just that they were promised internally, but they made a big public commitment about this with a blog post and everything else. And then to not follow through on that is, man, something seems off. Vibes are off.

Nick Halaris: (1:01:57) Yeah. That seems crazy. And in this media tour, are they, like, spilling the beans, or are they just - what are they saying, I guess, is the question?

Nathan Labenz: (1:02:05) They're basically saying that they don't have confidence in OpenAI leadership to be responsible over the next coming years. They're basically saying that they don't see progress stopping, that they do expect that with more data and compute and with continued work on algorithms, although honestly, they don't even really believe that we need all that much more breakthrough on algorithms, I don't think. I think they're mostly just like, if we just keep doing what we're doing of just continuing to build bigger data sets and bigger data centers, then we're probably gonna get to something that is more powerful than human. The super in super alignment referred to superhuman. So the idea was how do we figure out how to make AI systems that are more powerful than us work for us as opposed to getting out of our control? So they basically are like, we don't see progress stopping. We think that we are headed for this sort of event horizon where we're gonna have systems more powerful than us. We did not get what we were promised publicly in terms of resources to do the research on this problem, and we don't trust that leadership is taking it seriously enough. That's basically the message. Got it. There are probably more that people would like to know that - I'm sure you're familiar with the meme or, again, I don't know because I'm so in my bubble. But the meme in the AI space is what did Ilya see? And that refers to when Sam Altman was briefly fired before being reinstated last fall around Thanksgiving time. The chief scientist, Ilya Sutskever, apologies if I'm not saying his name quite right, towering person in the field, multiple breakthroughs associated with his work. He was on the board, and he voted to fire Sam initially. And then he backtracked partly because I think Sam was gonna prevail anyway. They were all gonna go to Microsoft. I think he realized, oh, shit. I'm outflanked. So I might as well back off of this. It's not gonna work. Anyway, now he's left OpenAI, but people ask, what did he see? Was there some breakthrough? Was there some, you know, new capability that freaked him out? That has not been disclosed. And I think the answer there is they wouldn't tell us if there were because the safety minded people are often of the opinion that even disclosing what is possible is not great for safety because then you're just gonna encourage a bunch of other people to pick up on that line of research, and they'll figure it out. So if we were to say, hey, we made a - we're really freaked out because somebody in our research group just made a highly autonomous AI that's doing all these insane things, their worry is all of a sudden, everybody would be like, wait, that's achievable? That can be done? Then we better go figure out how to do it too. And then that just means even more - even more data and compute and everything is getting poured into it. And so then it's gonna be even shorter timelines before all this stuff happens. That's even less time to do the safety research. So we really don't know. Outside of the company, very few people have a real sense of what exactly has been the breakthroughs inside the companies. And the safety folks that have left wouldn't tell us even if they had something, like, very concrete, I think, that they were most concerned with. They would still probably give the sort of vague story so as not to, like, give too many clues to other people that they would - and that would include, like, the Chinese government, for example, in terms of who would you be really concerned about picking this stuff up and running with it in a way that might actually work, but that would be potentially unsafe or generally problematic? Think of the Chinese government as being at the top of that list.

Nick Halaris: (1:05:44) Yeah. That was gonna be one of my questions too because it seems like from all this discussion, like, who controls AI as it develops is going to be an incredibly important question. And it could be an existential question. It could be like world domination question. And it sounds like American companies have a big lead, but is that a true assumption? Is there anything in the rest of the world that would give you pause for concern?

Nathan Labenz: (1:06:14) That's a very good question, and I don't think there is consensus on it. I'd say there is consensus that the US companies are currently in the lead. The top three are pretty much universally agreed to be OpenAI, Google DeepMind, and Anthropic in some order. Slightly more detail there would be OpenAI is probably pushing the scale hardest and fastest, and so they probably have the single most powerful single thing. Like, they have the best model that's available publicly, and people generally assume that they're a little bit farther along in making the single most powerful integrated system. Google DeepMind has a bigger team and has done all these things like AlphaFold and the shipping API that we talked about earlier. So they're not just doing one single thing and saying, like, how can we take this to the max? They're also - they are doing that, but they're maybe a little bit behind OpenAI, and then they're also doing, like, this broad portfolio of things for kind of specific areas in science. And I love that work because that stuff is not gonna get out of control. You really don't have to worry about the shipping API getting out of control because really all it does is it takes in, like, containers that you need to ship and boats that you have and, like, optimizes the plan, and it's gonna do its thing. And, like, those narrow systems, I think, are really great contributions to humanity. Demis Hassabis, the CEO of DeepMind, like, very well might be a Nobel Prize candidate for one of several of these different things that they've made over time. So that's awesome. And then Anthropic is - they're the most safety focused of them all. Remember their founders left OpenAI to found this company. So they're very much like, they are a business, but the reason they're a business, the way they tell their own story is we're really concerned with the safety questions. We really wanna figure out how these systems work. But to do that, we have to have the systems. OpenAI is not gonna let us into their systems. Google's not gonna let us into theirs. We have to build our own in order to be able to study them effectively. And then because it costs so much, because we have to have these, like, massive data centers and all this compute and all these resources, then we also have to make a business out of it. So it's a very elaborate path to get back to basically being a company. They started with this idea of we just wanna do this, but, oh, shit. We gotta have all these resources so then we gotta go to market. So they end up back in the same place. So those are definitely the leaders. Huge question is, how far behind is China? I don't know. I don't think there's real consensus there, but my personal feeling is that they're not actually that far behind. I read a lot of research papers. The percentage of names on the research papers that are Chinese is very high. The percentage of papers that come from Chinese institutions is, like, a minority, but they do good work and they put it out in English, which also always amazes me. And but then also from the American institutions, a lot of Chinese names. Sometimes it'll be, like, a Microsoft research paper, but all the names will be Chinese. I was told that at the last AI conference that was in New Orleans - just walk - I didn't attend personally, but just walking around on the floor, lots of conversations were happening in Mandarin. So I think that the Chinese, like, research talent pool is very much like a worthy match for ours. The prevailing attitudes are definitely a question. Are they gonna let a company put the pedal to the metal in the same way that by default here, companies can just do it. Right? You can develop technology. And until it's, like, evidently dangerous, the presumption is that you can develop whatever technology you wanna develop. It's not really quite like that there. The government definitely has a more sort of hands on and earlier in the process engagement to say, are we gonna let this happen or not happen? How does this impact our future power? They're definitely thinking a bit longer term that way for better or for worse, probably for both in different ways. And then there's the other big resource which is compute. So this is why the Biden administration has put the chip ban on China. We're not selling them chips, and the thought is that can help us maintain a lead. Right? Because there's data, compute, and algorithms. They have as much data as we do. They have more people than we do. In terms of just data collection, they have less privacy rights. They're able to hoover up all the social media data and consolidate data in ways that we comparatively struggle to. So if anything, they probably have bigger, better access to data than we do. Plus they can use all the Western data, and we can't necessarily because a lot of our stuff is open and their stuff isn't so open. Plus we don't read Chinese. They all speak English. We can't speak Chinese. So they've got a lot of data advantages, I would say. Research we just covered. I think we're a bit ahead. There's no shortage of Chinese talent. And then compute. The idea is if we put this chip ban on and we won't sell them chips, then they'll be short of compute, and that will be their bottleneck. And that will allow us to maintain our lead. We'll see is all I can say about that. They do have their own domestic chip industry. It's not as advanced as what the West has. And interestingly, if this - as if this needed to be any more complicated, the best chipmaker is a Taiwanese company. So that just further thickens the plot. Right? That the best chip company is TSMC. They're in Taiwan. Taiwan is obviously under semi somewhat whatever ambiguous US protection. China says it's part of China. TSMC has said that if they are invaded - if Taiwan is invaded, that they have the ability to basically remote disable all of their technology so that the Chinese government couldn't take it over, whether that's true or a bluff or how true or whatever. But this is, like, extremely high stakes poker that is being played. And meanwhile, the Chinese chip sector is getting huge investment. Right? They're like, okay. You're not gonna sell to us. I guess we gotta make our own chip industry. And, honestly, I would not bet against them. The chip business is the most complicated industry in the world. People would say pretty confidently that there's nothing harder to make than an advanced GPU. It's an, you know, extremely hard business to break into. At this point, the prize pool is so rich that you actually do see startups coming into this space as well, but they're, like, big underdogs. But when we refuse to sell them chips, we also create a captive market for the Chinese chip makers. Right? So if you were ever to say, jeez, if you wanted to create the conditions where the Chinese chip makers would catch up, what would you do? How about you give them the entire Chinese market with no outside competition? That's what we've just done by refusing to sell them chips. So now all the Chinese chip buyers, the companies that wanna make the AI models, they might like to go buy from NVIDIA or AMD or Intel or whatever or Samsung, but they can't, or at least not without going through the black market, which is also happening to some extent. And that's why it's - that's another reason that it's hard to assess exactly what's going on. But if you can't buy from any of those companies and you can only buy from your domestic Chinese maker, then that's what you'll probably have to do. And that's gonna then create a super big opportunity domestically, which the government - the Chinese government is also doubling down on, pouring billions into trying to figure out what barriers do we have. There was just a case where somebody from Google, a Chinese employee of Google, was found to have stolen a bunch of plans for the TPU, which is Google's proprietary - people know GPUs. That's - comes from graphics processing unit. Google made their own version a bunch of years ago, and they're on, like, generation 5 or 6 now. The tensor processing unit, which is a similar thing for AI purposes. I'm not an expert in it, and the details don't matter at this level anyway. But, basically, the TPU, it works, and Google uses it. And some dude was just indicted or whatever for having stolen a bunch of those plans on a thumb drive and shipped them back to China. They're mobilizing all these different resources, whether it's capital, anything they can do, including stealing IP to try to catch up now that they can't buy on the open market. I hate this, honestly. My whole view of the US-China conflict is I think it's really dumb. You can't tell me any good reason that these two countries should be rivals or should be enemies. And rivals, maybe I could accept, but that we should be enemies or, you know, adversaries. It's like we're on opposite sides of the world. We have - there's a giant ocean between us. We both have very secure positions. Can't we just get along? Like, we're not neighbors even. We're not, like, competing over, like, immediate - we're not, like, grabbing at the same resources, really. So I don't see why we should be in such constant opposition. And I think that's a just really sad failure of leadership. I definitely do say that the Chinese side has a lot to answer for there. I think we also could do better. And as we get into this AI moment, I'm like, man, the worst scenario would be for both sides to feel like we're in an existential competition for who can develop the most powerful AI as fast as possible because that's the scenario in which it's gonna be most likely to really get out of control. If we're both throwing caution to the wind, like end of World War 2 style where, you know, hey. We gotta do anything we can. Any scientific harebrained project, no matter how destructive it is, we gotta pursue it because they might pursue it. We gotta get there first. Next thing we're dropping an atomic bomb. Now the Soviets are - and how did they get the bomb? They stole the plans from us, and now they build their bombs. And now we've got thousands of nuclear bombs 80 years later that are still on, like, hair trigger alert. It's like, this is an insane reality that we've created for ourselves. And if we can't figure out a better way to get along with the Chinese, unfortunately, I feel like we're headed for a similar dynamic of an AI arms race, which would just be a really sad outcome and probably a very dangerous outcome. In my view, even more dangerous than nuclear weapons because the nuclear weapons are obviously extremely destructive, but they don't fire themselves. They don't have a potential for surprising us in ways that the AIs very well could surprise us. So yeah. I wish we would just swallow our pride a little bit, and we'd take some similar, you know, good faith effort on the Chinese side, and that may be not forthcoming. But if I was the president of the United States, I would be like, you know what? We have our differences, and you've done a lot of things wrong, including stealing a bunch of IP from us. But the real - my new talking point is in the AI era, the true others are the AIs, not the Chinese. So I would like us to at least make some high level common cause around, let's develop this technology, but let's not race into it. Can we find some way to work together to trust one another enough that we can both develop it in a responsible way. Unfortunately, I don't know that's likely to happen, but that would be my - I'd rather go down - if we're going down in a weird way, I'd rather go down trying to work with the Chinese than racing the Chinese to see who can make the most powerful AI.

Nick Halaris: (1:17:52) Yeah. I like that. It's like there's this opportunity, and it's a short window, it sounds, because the technology is moving fast. There's an opportunity to think about the social contract from a global standpoint. If AI is the true other in the equation, then there is this thing that could unite us, which is like how do we harness this technology so that it benefits the whole world and we don't bog ourselves down in useless conflict and create a global governance structure. I'm no tech expert, but it sounds like with the atomic bomb, this stuff can just basically be stolen at any moment. And so the idea that it's gonna be, like, held captive in that one data center in America is - it seems unlikely. Like, there's just too much - the world is too connected and digital files can be transferred. So this stuff's gonna go everywhere, and so we probably should get serious about putting together, like, a global governance framework for AI. Sounds like that's the path we should go down. We probably won't. I'm pessimistic on that just given the nature of the leadership landscape, not just here in America, but everywhere. We probably won't go down that road. It sounds like the AI arms race is fully on. That's what it sounds like. But we could at least be - that you and I could be voices for a different approach and maybe reach some people that way.

Nathan Labenz: (1:19:13) Yeah. Unfortunately, I think that's basically a good summary. I do feel like I'm fighting a losing battle when I advocate for this position. There's certainly plenty of people who are with us. And a lot of these people, by the way, have been working on - when you talk about, like, the AI safety, AI policy, AI governance communities, there are communities. People have been doing this work for years with really what now looks like incredible foresight before GPT-3 even - people talk about ChatGPT as, like, the public moment. GPT-3 was for a lot of people the moment. GPT-2 for some people was the moment. But some of these people were even doing this kind of work even before that on a really purely theoretical basis. And so I was not among them. I definitely wanna give them the credit for having the foresight and being on top of this, but it is tough to overcome the momentum of, like, great power conflict. And I unfortunately do think it does seem like we're trending toward the race being on. So I'd love to find some way to undo that. And people are like, jeez, what could that be? And warning shots is one concept that people talk about. That's the idea that maybe something will happen that will shock the system enough that people will think, shit, we're on the wrong path. And it's become very obvious. And, unfortunately, that would probably have to be a really bad thing that would have to happen. And so that puts people in this, like, weird position sometimes being like, obviously, nobody wants really bad things to happen, but maybe we do need a little bit of a jolt to get us out of this notion that this is all just another tool, and we're just gonna do it and whatever, and it'll be fine, and into a more thoughtful approach. But, yeah, that even work is still a question or we - or would that even have that effect? When I say work, I do not advocate for trying to make bad things happen with AI by any means. But if some catastrophic accident were to happen, would that have the hoped for effect of snapping people to a different sort of attention? Only time will tell. But even then, you'd certainly still have your many voices in the room, and many people would be saying this could have easily been prevented, and let's not throw the baby out with the bathwater. And we still can't trust China, by the way. Just because this happened doesn't mean we should - what are we gonna just believe everything Xi says because something bad happened? So it's not gonna be easy in probably any scenario, I'm afraid.

Nick Halaris: (1:21:48) I know. And there's this weird relationship that we have with technology. And even the ancient Greeks were thinking about it. Right? They had the myth of Prometheus and fire, and Zeus got mad at him for giving him fire. I think it's - to me, this is like a moral question. I had a guest on here who writes a popular newsletter. His name is Evan Armstrong. He writes a newsletter called Napkin Math. And he has this interesting perspective basically saying human beings have a moral obligation to try to produce products and services that are cheaper and better. And that comes from a place of, hey. The world is really unequal, and there's a bunch of people who are suffering. And ever since he said that, I've been thinking a lot about it, like, whether that's true. And I actually don't know. I don't have an answer yet, but I think it's a profound question, and it applies big time to AI because the question is - you could make the argument that maybe we should just stop. Right? That's what some of the safety people say because of all the potential downsides. But the vision that you articulated, which is so exciting, makes you think, like, why would we stop it if we could get rid of all this drudgery and suffering on Earth? It's a really profound question.

Nathan Labenz: (1:22:56) Yeah. I think if there's one - to try to synthesize all this into a recommended way forward, it's - again, it's gonna be tough. I know I'm not Pollyanna about any of this. But if we could put aside for a second the rivalry with the Chinese and imagine we have some meeting of the minds there, and we're just now returning to the question of what do we do with the technology itself? My recommendation would be focus on with basically the current level of power we have or maybe a little bit more. I think we're not - maybe - to the right now, I'd say we're in the sweet spot where the systems have become very useful, but they're not so powerful that they're likely to get out of control. GPT-4 is really great, but it's genuinely not a risk to take over the world. And GPT-5 will probably be similar in that it'll be even more capable, even more useful, but even without any safeguards, like, it's probably not going to be, like, an existential threat. GPT-6, 7, I don't know. But if we take a GPT-4 or GPT-5 and really try to make that work in particular scenarios and just go through - go through all these things, medicine, law, whatever, shipping. There's all these, like, problems that I think if we took the incredible brainpower that is at the leading developers and we said - if we just reoriented it a bit and said, instead of just trying to make the next thing even more powerful than the current thing, can we make the current thing more useful? Can we make it more reliable? Can we make it more accessible? I think that would deliver us the bulk of the value that we're looking for. OpenAI had a really good talk about this online recently, actually. It was - I just happened to see it on Twitter. In law, they are partnered with this company called Harvey, and they have an offering that they call custom models where they basically take GPT-4, but they deeply customize it for a particular scenario. So for their partnership with Harvey, they're customizing it to the legal domain. And this is not something where they're, like, scaling up. It doesn't require bigger data centers, but it just - I don't wanna minimize the work because it's, like, real work. Right? In my view, this is, like, what we should be doing a lot more of. They're really dialing in. What does good performance look like in the law? And how do we get that? And how do we evaluate that? And if it's really hard to evaluate, because a lot of times it is. Right? You're talking write a legal brief. Shit. Who's gonna evaluate that? You know? That becomes its own bottleneck is you gotta hire high end lawyers just to evaluate the AI outputs so that - they're developing techniques and semi automated techniques and proxies for what does a good result look like. And they've made incredible progress. Like, the Harvey custom model is way better than GPT-4 in its area of legal research and writing. So I would love to see us do a lot more of that. When I say I'm an adoption accelerationist, hyperscaling pauser, it's like all that momentum, all that energy, all that money and resources that are going into, just make it 10 times better, just make it 10 - earn it 10 times bigger, and that'll be somewhat better. $100 billion data center. Instead of a $100 billion data center, I would suggest a $100 billion in projects to knock out medicine and law and shipping and 97 other things to make life tremendously better. And at the same time, double down on that interpretability science so that we really know what's going on. And then maybe we can return to the scale up with a richer world with a lot less urgent need with hopefully a lot more equality of access and hopefully a much better idea of how the systems actually work - and that, like my proposal for friendship with the Chinese may be overly idealistic, but I would still love to see us choose a path along those lines.

Nick Halaris: (1:26:53) Yeah. No. I like that vision a lot because it goes to addressing what we know is a problem around the world, which is like material suffering for people. And these tools are ready to tackle that. And so let's do that and get smarter. I like the vision personally as a non AI expert, but that's a perfect place to end this. You've been very generous with your time, man. Thank you so much. And I'm glad again for the introduction from our favorite teachers. Shout out Mrs. Voss. Shout out to Miss Cohut.

Nathan Labenz: (1:27:26) Yeah. For sure. We might have to do this again to discuss. I have a whole bunch of other questions, but on the governance side. But let's wait for some time to go by. Let's let the next kinda evolution happen, and we'll talk about what should the US government be doing to regulate all this.

Nick Halaris: (1:27:40) Yep. Sounds good. Thank you so much. It's been a lot of fun.

Nathan Labenz: (1:27:44) Thank you, Nick. It is both energizing and enlightening to hear why people listen and learn what they value about the show. So please don't hesitate to reach out via email at tcr@turpentine.co, or you can DM me on the social media platform of your choice.

 Published in:
 Episode

Read next

 Episode

All Compute Is Food: Palisade's Jeffrey Ladish on AI Shutdown Resistance, Self-Replication & Ecology

 Episode

The Model Eats the Scaffolding: DeepMind's Logan Kilpatrick & Tulsee Doshi on 3.5 Flash, Omni & More

 Episode

Three Kinds of Software Survive: Tasklet's Andrew Lee on Competing to be a Horizontal Platform

 Episode

Milliseconds to Match: Criteo's AdTech AI & the Future of Commerce w/ Diarmuid Gill & Liva Ralaivola

 Join the Forefront of the AI Revolution

Be the first to know when new episodes drop. Subscribe now for exclusive insights from AI trailblazers and in-depth analysis straight to your inbox.

 Subscribe

Great! Check your inbox and click the link.

Sorry, something went wrong. Please try again.

 A weekly podcast where host Nathan Labenz interviews AI innovators, diving into the transformative impact AI will have in the near future.

Twitter

Youtube

Youtube

RSS

Apple Podcasts

Spotify

 Navigation

 Home

 Job Board

 Episodes

 Sponsor

 Acclaim

 Contact

 Listen On

 - YouTube

 - Spotify

 - Apple Podcasts

 - RSS

 About

 More

 Sign up

 Produced by AI Podcasting — Record. We handle the rest.

 System
 Light
 Dark
